Over hill, over dale,
Thorough bush, thorough brier, Over park, over pale,
Thorough flood, thorough fire! I do wander everywhere,
Swifter than the moon's sphere; And I serve the Fairy Queen,
To dew her orbs upon the green; The cowslips tall her pensioners be; In their gold coats spots you see; Those be rubies, fairy favours;
In those freckles live their savours;
I must go seek some dewdrops here, And hang a pearl in every cowslip's ear.

FROM off a hill whose concave womb reworded A plaintful story from a sistering vale,
My spirits to attend this double voice accorded, And down I laid to list the sad-tuned tale;
Ere long espied a fickle maid full pale, Tearing of papers, breaking rings a-twain,
Storming her world with sorrow's wind and rain.

Upon her head a platted hive of straw, Which fortified her visage from the sun,
Whereon the thought might think sometime it saw The carcass of beauty spent and done:
Time had not scythed all that youth begun,
Nor youth all quit; but, spite of heaven's fell rage, Some beauty peep'd through lattice of sear'd age.

Oft did she heave her napkin to her eyne, Which on it had conceited characters, Laundering the silken figures in the brine That season'd woe had pelleted in tears, And often reading what contents it bears; As often shrieking undistinguish'd woe,
In clamours of all size, both high and low.

Sometimes her levell'd eyes their carriage ride, As they did battery to the spheres intend; Sometime diverted their poor balls are tied
To the orbed earth; sometimes they do extend Their view right on; anon their gazes lend
To every place at once, and, nowhere fix'd, The mind and sight distractedly commix'd.

Her hair, nor loose nor tied in formal plat, Proclaim'd in her a careless hand of pride
For some, untuck'd, descended her sheaved hat, Hanging her pale and pined cheek beside;
Some in her threaden fillet still did bide,
And true to bondage would not break from thence, Though slackly braided in loose negligence.
A thousand favours from a maund she drew Of amber, crystal, and of beaded jet,
Which one by one she in a river threw, Upon whose weeping margent she was set; Like usury, applying wet to wet,
Or monarch's hands that let not bounty fall
Where want cries some, but where excess begs all.

Of folded schedules had she many a one,
Which she perused, sigh'd, tore, and gave the flood; Crack'd many a ring of posied gold and bone Bidding them find their sepulchres in mud;
Found yet moe letters sadly penn'd in blood, With sleided silk feat and affectedly Enswathed, and seal'd to curious secrecy.

These often bathed she in her fluxive eyes, And often kiss'd, and often 'gan to tear: Cried 'O false blood, thou register of lies, What unapproved witness dost thou bear!
Ink would have seem'd more black and damned here!' This said, in top of rage the lines she rents,
Big discontent so breaking their contents.

A reverend man that grazed his cattle nigh-- Sometime a blusterer, that the ruffle knew Of court, of city, and had let go by
The swiftest hours, observed as they flew-- Towards this afflicted fancy fastly drew, And, privileged by age, desires to know
In brief the grounds and motives of her woe.

So slides he down upon his grained bat, And comely-distant sits he by her side; When he again desires her, being sat, Her grievance with his hearing to divide:
If that from him there may be aught applied Which may her suffering ecstasy assuage, 'Tis promised in the charity of age.

'Father,' she says, 'though in me you behold
The injury of many a blasting hour, Let it not tell your judgment I am old;
Not age, but sorrow, over me hath power:
I might as yet have been a spreading flower, Fresh to myself, If I had self-applied
Love to myself and to no love beside.

'But, woe is me! too early I attended
A youthful suit--it was to gain my grace--
Of one by nature's outwards so commended, That maidens' eyes stuck over all his face:
Love lack'd a dwelling, and made him her place; And when in his fair parts she did abide,
She was new lodged and newly deified.

'His browny locks did hang in crooked curls; And every light occasion of the wind
Upon his lips their silken parcels hurls. What's sweet to do, to do will aptly find: Each eye that saw him did enchant the mind, For on his visage was in little drawn
What largeness thinks in Paradise was sawn.

'Small show of man was yet upon his chin; His phoenix down began but to appear Like unshorn velvet on that termless skin
Whose bare out-bragg'd the web it seem'd to wear: Yet show'd his visage by that cost more dear;
And nice affections wavering stood in doubt If best were as it was, or best without.

'His qualities were beauteous as his form,
For maiden-tongued he was, and thereof free; Yet, if men moved him, was he such a storm As oft 'twixt May and April is to see,
When winds breathe sweet, untidy though they be. His rudeness so with his authorized youth
Did livery falseness in a pride of truth.

'Well could he ride, and often men would say 'That horse his mettle from his rider takes: Proud of subjection, noble by the sway,
What rounds, what bounds, what course, what stop he makes!'
And controversy hence a question takes, Whether the horse by him became his deed, Or he his manage by the well-doing steed.

'But quickly on this side the verdict went: His real habitude gave life and grace
To appertainings and to ornament, Accomplish'd in himself, not in his case:
All aids, themselves made fairer by their place, Came for additions; yet their purposed trim Pieced not his grace, but were all graced by him.

'So on the tip of his subduing tongue
All kinds of arguments and question deep, All replication prompt, and reason strong, For his advantage still did wake and sleep:
To make the weeper laugh, the laugher weep, He had the dialect and different skill, Catching all passions in his craft of will:

'That he did in the general bosom reign
Of young, of old; and sexes both enchanted, To dwell with him in thoughts, or to remain
In personal duty, following where he haunted: Consents bewitch'd, ere he desire, have granted; And dialogued for him what he would say,
Ask'd their own wills, and made their wills obey.

'Many there were that did his picture get, To serve their eyes, and in it put their mind; Like fools that in th' imagination set
The goodly objects which abroad they find
Of lands and mansions, theirs in thought assign'd; And labouring in moe pleasures to bestow them Than the true gouty landlord which doth owe them:

'So many have, that never touch'd his hand, Sweetly supposed them mistress of his heart. My woeful self, that did in freedom stand, And was my own fee-simple, not in part,
What with his art in youth, and youth in art, Threw my affections in his charmed power, Reserved the stalk and gave him all my flower.

'Yet did I not, as some my equals did, Demand of him, nor being desired yielded; Finding myself in honour so forbid,
With safest distance I mine honour shielded: Experience for me many bulwarks builded
Of proofs new-bleeding, which remain'd the foil Of this false jewel, and his amorous spoil.

'But, ah, who ever shunn'd by precedent The destined ill she must herself assay?
Or forced examples, 'gainst her own content, To put the by-past perils in her way?
Counsel may stop awhile what will not stay; For when we rage, advice is often seen
By blunting us to make our wits more keen.

'Nor gives it satisfaction to our blood, That we must curb it upon others' proof;
To be forbod the sweets that seem so good, For fear of harms that preach in our behoof. O appetite, from judgment stand aloof!
The one a palate hath that needs will taste, Though Reason weep, and cry, 'It is thy last.'

'For further I could say 'This man's untrue,' And knew the patterns of his foul beguiling;
Heard where his plants in others' orchards grew, Saw how deceits were gilded in his smiling; Knew vows were ever brokers to defiling; Thought characters and words merely but art, And bastards of his foul adulterate heart.

'And long upon these terms I held my city, Till thus he gan besiege me: 'Gentle maid, Have of my suffering youth some feeling pity, And be not of my holy vows afraid:
That's to ye sworn to none was ever said; For feasts of love I have been call'd unto,
Till now did ne'er invite, nor never woo.

''All my offences that abroad you see
Are errors of the blood, none of the mind; Love made them not: with acture they may be, Where neither party is nor true nor kind:
They sought their shame that so their shame did find; And so much less of shame in me remains,
By how much of me their reproach contains.

''Among the many that mine eyes have seen,
Not one whose flame my heart so much as warm'd, Or my affection put to the smallest teen,
Or any of my leisures ever charm'd:
Harm have I done to them, but ne'er was harm'd; Kept hearts in liveries, but mine own was free, And reign'd, commanding in his monarchy.

''Look here, what tributes wounded fancies sent me, Of paled pearls and rubies red as blood;
Figuring that they their passions likewise lent me Of grief and blushes, aptly understood
In bloodless white and the encrimson'd mood; Effects of terror and dear modesty,
Encamp'd in hearts, but fighting outwardly.

''And, lo, behold these talents of their hair, With twisted metal amorously impleach'd, I have received from many a several fair,
Their kind acceptance weepingly beseech'd, With the annexions of fair gems enrich'd, And deep-brain'd sonnets that did amplify Each stone's dear nature, worth, and quality.

''The diamond,--why, 'twas beautiful and hard, Whereto his invised properties did tend;
The deep-green emerald, in whose fresh regard Weak sights their sickly radiance do amend; The heaven-hued sapphire and the opal blend With objects manifold: each several stone,
With wit well blazon'd, smiled or made some moan.
''Lo, all these trophies of affections hot,
Of pensived and subdued desires the tender, Nature hath charged me that I hoard them not, But yield them up where I myself must render, That is, to you, my origin and ender;
For these, of force, must your oblations be, Since I their altar, you enpatron me.

''O, then, advance of yours that phraseless hand, Whose white weighs down the airy scale of praise; Take all these similes to your own command, Hallow'd with sighs that burning lungs did raise; What me your minister, for you obeys,
Works under you; and to your audit comes Their distract parcels in combined sums.

''Lo, this device was sent me from a nun, Or sister sanctified, of holiest note;
Which late her noble suit in court did shun, Whose rarest havings made the blossoms dote; For she was sought by spirits of richest coat, But kept cold distance, and did thence remove, To spend her living in eternal love.

''But, O my sweet, what labour is't to leave
The thing we have not, mastering what not strives, Playing the place which did no form receive, Playing patient sports in unconstrained gyves?
She that her fame so to herself contrives, The scars of battle 'scapeth by the flight,
And makes her absence valiant, not her might.

''O, pardon me, in that my boast is true: The accident which brought me to her eye Upon the moment did her force subdue, And now she would the caged cloister fly: Religious love put out Religion's eye:
Not to be tempted, would she be immured, And now, to tempt, all liberty procured.

''How mighty then you are, O, hear me tell! The broken bosoms that to me belong
Have emptied all their fountains in my well, And mine I pour your ocean all among:
I strong o'er them, and you o'er me being strong, Must for your victory us all congest,
As compound love to physic your cold breast.

''My parts had power to charm a sacred nun, Who, disciplined, ay, dieted in grace, Believed her eyes when they to assail begun, All vows and consecrations giving place:
O most potential love! vow, bond, nor space, In thee hath neither sting, knot, nor confine, For thou art all, and all things else are thine.

''When thou impressest, what are precepts worth Of stale example? When thou wilt inflame,
How coldly those impediments stand forth Of wealth, of filial fear, law, kindred, fame!
Love's arms are peace, 'gainst rule, 'gainst sense, 'gainst shame,
And sweetens, in the suffering pangs it bears, The aloes of all forces, shocks, and fears.

''Now all these hearts that do on mine depend, Feeling it break, with bleeding groans they pine; And supplicant their sighs to you extend,
To leave the battery that you make 'gainst mine, Lending soft audience to my sweet design,
And credent soul to that strong-bonded oath That shall prefer and undertake my troth.'

'This said, his watery eyes he did dismount, Whose sights till then were levell'd on my face; Each cheek a river running from a fount
With brinish current downward flow'd apace: O, how the channel to the stream gave grace! Who glazed with crystal gate the glowing roses
That flame through water which their hue encloses.

'O father, what a hell of witchcraft lies In the small orb of one particular tear! But with the inundation of the eyes
What rocky heart to water will not wear? What breast so cold that is not warmed here? O cleft effect! cold modesty, hot wrath,
Both fire from hence and chill extincture hath.

'For, lo, his passion, but an art of craft, Even there resolved my reason into tears; There my white stole of chastity I daff'd, Shook off my sober guards and civil fears; Appear to him, as he to me appears,
All melting; though our drops this difference bore, His poison'd me, and mine did him restore.

'In him a plenitude of subtle matter,
Applied to cautels, all strange forms receives, Of burning blushes, or of weeping water,
Or swooning paleness; and he takes and leaves, In either's aptness, as it best deceives,
To blush at speeches rank to weep at woes, Or to turn white and swoon at tragic shows.

'That not a heart which in his level came Could 'scape the hail of his all-hurting aim, Showing fair nature is both kind and tame;
And, veil'd in them, did win whom he would maim: Against the thing he sought he would exclaim; When he most burn'd in heart-wish'd luxury,
He preach'd pure maid, and praised cold chastity.

'Thus merely with the garment of a Grace The naked and concealed fiend he cover'd; That th' unexperient gave the tempter place, Which like a cherubin above them hover'd.
Who, young and simple, would not be so lover'd? Ay me! I fell; and yet do question make
What I should do again for such a sake.

'O, that infected moisture of his eye,
O, that false fire which in his cheek so glow'd, O, that forced thunder from his heart did fly, O, that sad breath his spongy lungs bestow'd, O, all that borrow'd motion seeming owed,
Would yet again betray the fore-betray'd, And new pervert a reconciled maid!'




Crabbed Age and Youth Cannot live together:
Youth is full of pleasance, Age is full of care;
Youth like summer morn, Age like winter weather; Youth like summer brave, Age like winter bare:
Youth is full of sports, Age's breath is short,
Youth is nimble, Age is lame: Youth is hot and bold,
Age is weak and cold,
Youth is wild, and Age is tame:- Age, I do abhor thee;
Youth, I do adore thee;
O! my Love, my Love is young! Age, I do defy thee-
O sweet shepherd, hie thee,
For methinks thou stay'st too long. 


All the world's a stage,
And all the men and women merely players; They have their exits and their entrances, And one man in his time plays many parts, His acts being seven ages. At first, the infant, Mewling and puking in the nurse's arms.
Then the whining schoolboy, with his satchel And shining morning face, creeping like snail Unwillingly to school. And then the lover, Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad Made to his mistress' eyebrow. Then a soldier,
Full of strange oaths and bearded like the pard, Jealous in honor, sudden and quick in quarrel, Seeking the bubble reputation
Even in the cannon's mouth. And then the justice, In fair round belly with good capon lined,
With eyes severe and beard of formal cut, Full of wise saws and modern instances;
And so he plays his part. The sixth age shifts Into the lean and slippered pantaloon,
With spectacles on nose and pouch on side; His youthful hose, well saved, a world too wide For his shrunk shank, and his big manly voice, Turning again toward childish treble, pipes And whistles in his sound. Last scene of all, That ends this strange eventful history,
Is second childishness and mere oblivion,
Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything.


Enobarbus: I will tell you.
The barge she sat in, like a burnish'd throne, Burned on the water: the poop was beaten gold; Purple the sails, and so perfumed that
The winds were lovesick with them; the oars were silver, Which to the tune of flutes kept stroke, and made
The water which they beat to follow faster,
As amorous of their strokes. For her own person, It beggar'd all description: she did lie
In her pavilion, cloth-of-gold of tissue, O'erpicturing that Venus where we see
The fancy outwork nature: on each side her Stood pretty dimpled boys, like smiling Cupids, With divers-colour'd fans, whose wind did seem To glow the delicate cheeks which they did cool, And what they undid did.

Agrippa: O, rare for Antony.

Enobarbus: Her gentlewomen, like the Nereides, So many mermaids, tended her i' th' eyes,
And made their bends adornings. At the helm A seeming mermaid steers: the silken tackle
Swell with the touches of those flower-soft hands That yarely frame the office. From the barge
A strange invisible perfume hits the sense Of the adjacent wharfs. The city cast
Her people out upon her; and Antony, Enthroned i' th' marketplace, did sit alone, Whistling to th' air; which, but for vacancy, Had gone to gaze on Cleopatra too,
And made a gap in nature. Agrippa: Rare Egyptian!
Enobarbus: Upon her landing, Antony sent to her, Invited her to supper. She replied
It should be better he became her guest; Which she entreated. Our courteous Antony,
Whom ne'er the word of &quot;No&quot; woman heard speak, Being barbered ten times o'er, goes to the feast,
And for his ordinary, pays his heart For what his eyes eat only.

Agrippa: Royal wench!
She made great Caesar lay his sword to bed; He plowed her, and she cropped.

Enobarbus: I saw her once
Hop forty paces through the public street;
And having lost her breath, she spoke, and panted, That she did make defect perfection,
And, breathless, pow'r breathe forth. Maecenas: Now Antony must leave her utterly.
Enobarbus: Never; He will not:
Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale Her infinite variety. Other women cloy
The appetites they feed, but she makes hungry Where most she satisfies; for vilest things Become themselves in her, that the holy priests Bless her when she is riggish.




HARK! hark! the lark at heaven's gate sings, And Phoebus 'gins arise,
His steeds to water at those springs On chaliced flowers that lies;
And winking Mary-buds begin To ope their golden eyes:
With everything that pretty bin, My lady sweet, arise!
Arise, arise!



Blow, blow, thou winter wind Thou art not so unkind
As man's ingratitude; Thy tooth is not so keen,
Because thou art not seen, Although thy breath be rude.

Heigh-ho! sing, heigh-ho! unto the green holly: Most freindship if feigning, most loving mere folly: Then heigh-ho, the holly!
This life is most jolly.

Freeze, freeze thou bitter sky, That does not bite so nigh
As benefits forgot:
Though thou the waters warp, Thy sting is not so sharp
As a friend remembered not.
Heigh-ho! sing, heigh-ho! unto the green holly: Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly: Then heigh-ho, the holly!
This life is most jolly. 


ROSES, their sharp spines being gone, Not royal in their smells alone, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;But in their hue; Maiden pinks, of odour faint,
Daisies smell-less, yet most quaint, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And sweet thyme true;

Primrose, firstborn child of Ver; Merry springtime's harbinger,
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;With her bells dim; Oxlips in their cradles growing, Marigolds on death-beds blowing, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Larks'-heels trim;

All dear Nature's children sweet
Lie 'fore bride and bridegroom's feet, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Blessing their sense! Not an angel of the air,
Bird melodious or bird fair, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Be absent hence!

The crow, the slanderous cuckoo, nor The boding raven, nor chough hoar, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nor chattering pye, May on our bride-house perch or sing, Or with them any discord bring, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;But from it fly!




COME away, come away, death, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And in sad cypres let me be laid; Fly away, fly away, breath;
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I am slain by a fair cruel maid. My shroud of white, stuck all with yew, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;O prepare it!
My part of death, no one so true &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Did share it.

Not a flower, not a flower sweet,
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;On my black coffin let there be strown;
Not a friend, not a friend greet
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;My poor corse, where my bones shall be thrown: A thousand thousand sighs to save,
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lay me, O, where Sad true lover never find my grave &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To weep there!




URNS and odours bring away! &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Vapours, sighs, darken the day! Our dole more deadly looks than dying; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Balms and gums and heavy cheers, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sacred vials fill'd with tears,
And clamours through the wild air flying!

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Come, all sad and solemn shows, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;That are quick-eyed Pleasure's foes! &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We convent naught else but woes.




OVER hill, over dale,
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Thorough bush, thorough brier, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Over park, over pale, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Thorough flood, thorough fire, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I do wander everywhere, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Swifter than the moone's sphere; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And I serve the fairy queen, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To dew her orbs upon the green: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The cowslips tall her pensioners be; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In their gold coats spots you see; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Those be rubies, fairy favours, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In those freckles live their savours: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I must go seek some dew-drops here, And hang a pearl in every cowslip's ear.




YOU spotted snakes with double tongue, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Thorny hedgehogs, be not seen; Newts and blind-worms, do no wrong; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Come not near our fairy queen.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Philomel, with melody, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sing in our sweet lullaby; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lulla, lulla, lullaby; lulla, lulla, lullaby! &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Never harm, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nor spell nor charm, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Come our lovely lady nigh; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;So, good night, with lullaby.

Weaving spiders, come not here; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hence, you long-legg'd spinners, hence! Beetles black, approach not near; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Worm nor snail, do no offence.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Philomel, with melody, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sing in our sweet lullaby; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lulla, lulla, lullaby; lulla, lulla, lullaby! &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Never harm, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nor spell nor charm, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Come our lovely lady nigh; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;So, good night, with lullaby.




COME unto these yellow sands, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And then take hands: Court'sied when you have, and kiss'd,-- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The wild waves whist,-- Foot it featly here and there;
And, sweet sprites, the burthen bear. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hark, hark! &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bow, wow, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The watch-dogs bark: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bow, wow. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hark, hark! I hear &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The strain of strutting chanticleer &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cry, Cock-a-diddle-dow!




Fear no more the heat o' the sun; Nor the furious winter's rages, Thou thy worldly task hast done,
Home art gone, and ta'en thy wages; Golden lads and girls all must,
As chimney sweepers come to dust.

Fear no more the frown of the great, Thou art past the tyrant's stroke: Care no more to clothe and eat;
To thee the reed is as the oak:
The sceptre, learning, physic, must All follow this, and come to dust.

Fear no more the lightning-flash, Nor the all-dread thunder-stone; Fear not slander, censure rash; Thou hast finished joy and moan; All lovers young, all lovers must Consign to thee, and come to dust.

No exorciser harm thee!
Nor no witchcraft charm thee! Ghost unlaid forbear thee!
Nothing ill come near thee! Quiet consummation have; And renowned be thy grave!




Her lily hand her rosy cheek lies under, Cozening the pillow of a lawful kiss;
Who, therefore angry, seems to part in sunder, Swelling on either side to want his bliss; Between whose hills her head entombed is;
Where like a virtuous monument she lies, To be admired of lewd unhallowed eyes.

Without the bed her other fair hand was, On the green coverlet, whose perfect white Showed like an April daisy on the grass, With pearly sweat resembling dew of night.
Her eyes, like marigolds, had sheathed their light, And canopied in darkness sweetly lay
Till they might open to adorn the day.

Her hair like golden threads played with her breath O modest wantons, wanton modesty!
Showing life's triumph in the map of death, And death's dim look in life's mortality.
Each in her sleep themselves so beautify
As if between them twain there were no strife, But that life lived in death, and death in life.

Her breasts like ivory globes circled with blue, A pair of maiden worlds unconquer d,
Save of their lord no bearing yoke they knew, And him by oath they truly honour d.
These worlds in Tarquin new ambition bred, Who like a foul usurper went about
From this fair throne to heave the owner out.

What could he see but mightily he noted? What did he note but strongly he desired? What he beheld, on that he firmly doted, And in his will his willful eye he tired.
With more than admiration he admired Her azure veins, her alabaster skin,
Her coral lips, her snow-white dimpled chin.
As the grim lion fawneth o'er his prey Sharp hunger by the conquest satisfied,
So o'er this sleeping soul doth Tarquin stay, His rage of lust by gazing qualified;
Slacked, not suppressed; for, standing by her side, His eye, which late this mutiny restrains,
Unto a greater uproar tempts his veins.

And they, like straggling slaves for pillage fighting, Obdurate vassals fell exploits effecting.
In bloody death and ravishment delighting,
Nor children's tears nor mothers' groans respecting, Swell in their pride, the onset still expecting.
Anon his beating heart, alarum striking,
Gives the hot charge and bids them do their liking.

His drumming heart cheers up his burning eye, His eye commends the leading to his hand;
His hand, as proud of such a dignity,
Smoking with pride, marched on to make his stand On her bare breast, the heart of all her land,
Whose ranks of blue veins, as his hand did scale, Left their round turrets destitute and pale.

They, mustering to the quiet cabinet Where their dear governess and lady lies, Do tell her she is dreadfully beset
And fright her with confusion of their cries.
She, much amazed, breaks ope her locked-up eyes, Who, peeping forth this tumult to behold,
Are by his flaming torch dimmed and controlled.

Imagine her as one in dead of night
From forth dull sleep by dreadful fancy waking, That thinks she hath beheld some ghastly sprite, Whose grim aspect sets every joint a-shaking.
What terror 'tis! but she, in worser taking, From sleep disturb d, heedfully doth view The sight which makes suppos d terror true.

Wrapped and confounded in a thousand fears,
Like to a new-killed bird she trembling lies.
She dares not look; yet, winking, there appears Quick-shifting antics ugly in her eyes.
Such shadows are the weak brain's forgeries, Who, angry that the eyes fly from their lights,
In darkness daunts them with more dreadful sights.

His hand, that yet remains upon her breast (Rude ram, to batter such an ivory wall!) May feel her heart (poor citizen) distressed, Wounding itself to death, rise up and fall,
Beating her bulk, that his hand shakes withal. This moves in him more rage and lesser pity, To make the breach and enter this sweet city.

William Shakespear


But, lo! from forth a copse that neighbours by, A breeding jennet, lusty, young, and proud, Adonis' trampling courser doth espy,
And forth she rushes, snorts and neighs aloud; The strong-neck'd steed, being tied unto a tree, Breaketh his rein, and to her straight goes he.

Imperiously he leaps, he neighs, he bounds, And now his woven girths he breaks asunder; The bearing earth with his hard hoof he wounds,
Whose hollow womb resounds like heaven's thunder; The iron bit he crushes 'tween his teeth
Controlling what he was controlled with.

His ears up-prick'd; his braided hanging mane Upon his compass'd crest now stand on end; His nostrils drink the air, and forth again,
As from a furnace, vapours doth he send: His eye, which scornfully glisters like fire, Shows his hot courage and his high desire.

Sometime her trots, as if he told the steps, With gentle majesty and modest pride; Anon he rears upright, curvets and leaps,
As who should say, 'Lo! thus my strength is tried; And this I do to captivate the eye
Of the fair breeder that is standing by.'

What recketh he his rider's angry stir, His flattering 'Holla,' or his 'Stand, I say?'
What cares he now for curb of pricking spur? For rich caparisons or trapping gay?
He sees his love, and nothing else he sees, Nor nothing else with his proud sight agrees.

Look, when a painter would surpass the life, In limning out a well-proportion'd steed,
His art with nature's workmanship at strife, As if the dead the living should exceed;
So did this horse excel a common one,
In shape, in courage, colour, pace and bone

Round-hoof'd, short-jointed, fetlocks shag and long, Broad breast, full eye, small head, and nostril wide, High crest, short ears, straight legs and passing strong, Thin mane, thick tail, broad buttock, tender hide:
Look, what a horse should have he did not lack, Save a proud rider on so proud a back.

Sometimes he scuds far off, and there he stares; Anon he starts at stirring of a feather;
To bid the wind a race he now prepares,
And whe'r he run or fly they know not whether; For through his mane and tail the high wind sings, Fanning the hairs, who wave like feather'd wings.

He looks upon his love, and neighs unto her; She answers him as if she knew his mind;
Being proud, as females are, to see him woo her, She puts on outward strangeness, seems unkind, Spurns at his love and scorns the heat he feels, Beating his kind embracements with her heels.

Then, like a melancholy malcontent,
He vails his tail that, like a falling plume Cool shadow to his melting buttock lent:
He stamps, and bites the poor flies in his fume. His love, perceiving how he is enrag'd,
Grew kinder, and his fury was assuag'd.

His testy master goeth about to take him; When lo! the unback'd breeder, full of fear, Jealous of catching, swiftly doth forsake him, With her the horse, and left Adonis there.
As they were mad, unto the wood they hie them, Out-stripping crows that strive to over-fly them.

I prophesy they death, my living sorrow,
If thou encounter with the boar to-morrow. &quot;But if thou needs wilt hunt, be rul'd by me;
Uncouple at the timorous flying hare, Or at the fox which lives by subtlety, Or at the roe which no encounter dare:
Pursue these fearful creatures o'er the downs,
And on they well-breath'd horse keep with they hounds.

&quot;And when thou hast on food the purblind hare, Mark the poor wretch, to overshoot his troubles
How he outruns with winds, and with what care He cranks and crosses with a thousand doubles: The many musits through the which he goes Are like a labyrinth to amaze his foes.

&quot;Sometime he runs among a flock of sheep, To make the cunning hounds mistake their smell, And sometime where earth-delving conies keep, To stop the loud pursuers in their yell,
And sometime sorteth with a herd of deer; Danger deviseth shifts; wit waits on fear:

&quot;For there his smell with other being mingled, The hot scent-snuffing hounds are driven to doubt, Ceasing their clamorous cry till they have singled With much ado the cold fault cleanly out;
Then do they spend their mouths: Echo replies, As if another chase were in the skies.

&quot;By this, poor Wat, far off upon a hill, Stands on his hinder legs with listening ear, To hearken if his foes pursue him still: Anon their loud alarums he doth hear;
And now his grief may be compared well
To one sore sick that hears the passing-bell.

&quot;Then shalt thou see the dew-bedabbled wretch Turn, and return, indenting with the way;
Each envious briar his weary legs doth scratch, Each shadow makes him stop, each murmur stay: For misery is trodden on by many,
And being low never reliev'd by any. &quot;Lie quietly, and hear a little more;
Nay, do not struggle, for thou shalt not rise: To make thee hate the hunting of the boar, Unlike myself thou hear'st me moralize, Applying this to that, and so to so;
For love can comment upon every woe.&quot; 


Full fathom five thy father lies; Of his bones are coral made;
Those are pearls that were his eyes: Nothing of him that doth fade
But doth suffer a sea-change Into something rich and strange.
Sea-nymphs hourly ring his knell: Ding-dong.
Hark! now I hear them,--ding-dong, bell. 


Hark! hark! the lark at heaven's gate sings, And Phoebus 'gins arise,
His steeds to water at those springs On chalic'd flowers that lies;
And winking Mary-buds begin To ope their golden eyes; With everything that pretty is, My lady sweet, arise:
Arise, arise!




Our remedies oft in ourselves do lie
Which we ascribe to heaven. The fated sky Gives us free scope, only doth backward pull Our slow designs when we ourselves are dull. What power is it which mounts my love so high, That makes me see, and cannot feed mine eye? The mightiest space in fortune nature brings
To join like likes and kiss like native things. Impossible be strange attempts to those
That weigh their pains in sense and do suppose What hath been cannot be. Who ever strove
To show her merit that did miss her love? 


IT was a lover and his lass,
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino, That o'er the green corn-field did pass,
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In the spring time, the only pretty ring time, When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding;
Sweet lovers love the spring.

Between the acres of the rye,
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino, These pretty country folks would lie,
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In the spring time, the only pretty ring time, When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding;
Sweet lovers love the spring.

This carol they began that hour,
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
How that life was but a flower
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In the spring time, the only pretty ring time, When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding;
Sweet lovers love the spring.

And, therefore, take the present time &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino, For love is crown&grave;d with the prime
In the spring time, the only pretty ring time, When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding; Sweet lovers love the spring.




Farewell!--God knows when we shall meet again. I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins That almost freezes up the heat of life:
I'll call them back again to comfort me;-- Nurse!--What should she do here?
My dismal scene I needs must act alone.-- Come, vial.--
What if this mixture do not work at all?
Shall I be married, then, to-morrow morning?-- No, No!--this shall forbid it:--lie thou there.-- What if it be a poison, which the friar
Subtly hath minister'd to have me dead,
Lest in this marriage he should be dishonour'd, Because he married me before to Romeo?
I fear it is: and yet methinks it should not, For he hath still been tried a holy man:--
I will not entertain so bad a thought.-- How if, when I am laid into the tomb, I wake before the time that Romeo
Come to redeem me? there's a fearful point! Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,
To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in, And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?
Or, if I live, is it not very like
The horrible conceit of death and night, Together with the terror of the place,-- As in a vault, an ancient receptacle,
Where, for this many hundred years, the bones Of all my buried ancestors are pack'd;
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth, Lies festering in his shroud; where, as they say, At some hours in the night spirits resort;-- Alack, alack, is it not like that I,
So early waking,--what with loathsome smells, And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth, That living mortals, hearing them, run mad;--
O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught, Environed with all these hideous fears? And madly play with my forefathers' joints?
And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud? And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone, As with a club, dash out my desperate brains?-- O, look! methinks I see my cousin's ghost
Seeking out Romeo, that did spit his body Upon a rapier's point:--stay, Tybalt, stay!-- Romeo, I come! this do I drink to thee.




TELL me where is Fancy bred, Or in the heart or in the head? How begot, how nourished?
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reply, reply. It is engender'd in the eyes,
With gazing fed; and Fancy dies In the cradle where it lies.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Let us all ring Fancy's knell: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I'll begin it,--Ding, dong, bell. All. Ding, dong, bell.




Three witches, casting a spell ...

Round about the cauldron go; In the poison'd entrails throw. Toad, that under cold stone Days and nights hast thirty one Swelter'd venom sleeping got,
Boil thou first i' the charmed pot.

Double, double toil and trouble; Fire burn and cauldron bubble.

Fillet of a fenny snake,
In the cauldron boil and bake; Eye of newt, and toe of frog, Wool of bat, and tongue of dog,
Adder's fork, and blind-worm's sting, Lizard's leg, and howlet's wing,
For a charm of powerful trouble, Like a hell-broth boil and bubble.

Double, double toil and trouble; Fire burn and cauldron bubble.

William Shakespear


Not from the stars do I my judgment pluck, And yet methinks I have astronomy;
But not to tell of good or evil luck,
Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons' quality; Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell, Pointing to each his thunder, rain, and wind, Or say with princes if it shall go well
By oft predict that I in heaven find.
But from thine eyes my knowledge I derive, And, constant stars, in them I read such art As truth and beauty shall together thrive
If from thyself to store thou wouldst convert: Or else of thee this I prognosticate,
Thy end is truth's and beauty's doom and date. 


Not marble nor the gilded monuments
Of princes shall outlive this powerful rhyme;
But you shall shine more bright in these contents Than unswept stone, besmear'd with sluttish time. When wasteful war shall statues overturn,
And broils root out the work of masonry,
Nor Mars his sword nor war's quick fire shall burn The living record of your memory.
'Gainst death and all-oblivious enmity
Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room, Even in the eyes of all posterity
That wear this world out to the ending doom. So, till the judgment that yourself arise,
You live in this, and dwell in lovers' eyes. William Shakespear

PUCK sings:
NOW the hungry lion roars,?
 And the wolf behowls the moon;? Whilst the heavy ploughman snores,?
 All with weary task fordone.? Now the wasted brands do glow,?
 Whilst the screech-owl, screeching loud,? Puts the wretch that lies in woe?
 In remembrance of a shroud.? Now it is the time of night,?
 That the graves, all gaping wide,? Every one lets forth his sprite,?
 In the churchway paths to glide:? And we fairies, that do run?
 By the triple Hecate's team,? From the presence of the sun,?
 Following darkness like a dream,? Now are frolic; not a mouse?
Shall disturb this hallowed house:? I am sent with broom before?
To sweep the dust behind the door.




Now, my co-mates and brothers in exile,
Hath not old customs make this life more sweet Than that of painted pomp? Are not these woods More free from peril than the envious court!
Here feel we not the penalty of Adam, The seasons difference; as the icy fang And churlish chiding of the winters wind,
Which when it bites and blows upon my body, Even till I shrink with cold, I smile and say This is no flattery; these are counsellors
That feelingly persuade me what I am. Sweet are the uses of adversity;
Which, like the toad, ugly and venomous, Wears yet a precious jewel in his head; And this our life, exempt from public haunt,
Finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks, Sermons in stones, and good in everything.


O mistress mine, where are you roaming? O stay and hear! your true-love's coming That can sing both high and low;
Trip no further, pretty sweeting, Journey's end in lovers' meeting- Every wise man's son doth know.

What is love? 'tis not hereafter; Present mirth hath present laughter; What's to come is still unsure:
In delay there lies no plenty,-
Then come kiss me, Sweet and twenty, Youth's a stuff will not endure.




O never say that I was false of heart, Though absence seem'd my flame to qualify: As easy might I from myself depart
As from my soul, which in thy breast doth lie;

That is my home of love; if I have ranged, Like him that travels, I return again,
Just to the time, not with the time exchanged, So that myself bring water for my stain.

Never believe, though in my nature reign'd All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood, That it could so preposterously be stain'd To leave for nothing all thy sum of good:

For nothing this wide universe I call, Save thou, my rose: in it thou art my all.

William Shakespear
ORPHEUS with his lute made trees And the mountain tops that freeze
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bow themselves when he did sing: To his music plants and flowers
Ever sprung; as sun and showers &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;There had made a lasting spring.

Every thing that heard him play, Even the billows of the sea,
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hung their heads and then lay by. In sweet music is such art,
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Killing care and grief of heart &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Fall asleep, or hearing, die.




 Orpheus with his lute made trees, And the mountain tops that freeze,
 Bow themselves, when he did sing: To his music plants and flowers
Ever sprung; as sun and showers There had made a lasting spring.

Everything that heard him play, Even the billows of the sea,
Hung their heads, and then lay by.
In sweet music is such art, Killing care and grief of heart
Fall asleep, or hearing, die.

William Shakespear


Shall I compare thee to a summer's day? Thou art more lovely and more temperate.
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May, And summer's lease hath all too short a date.
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines, And often is his gold complexion dimmed; And every fair from fair sometime declines,
By chance, or nature's changing course, untrimmed; But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow'st,
Nor shall death brag thou wand'rest in his shade, When in eternal lines to Time thou grow'st.
So long as men can breathe, or eyes can see, So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.




Sigh no more, ladies, sigh no more, Men were deceivers ever;
One foot in sea, and one on shore, To one thing constant never.
Then sigh not so, But let them go,
And be you blith and bonny, Converting all your sounds of woe Into Hey nonny, nonny.

Sing no more ditties, sing no mo Of dumps so dull and heavy; The fraud of men was ever so, Since summer first was leavy.
Then sigh not so, But let them go,
And be you blith and bonny, Converting all your sounds of woe Into Hey nonny, nonny.




WHO is Silvia? What is she?
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;That all our swains commend her? Holy, fair, and wise is she;
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The heaven such grace did lend her, That she might admired be.

Is she kind as she is fair?
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;For beauty lives with kindness: Love doth to her eyes repair, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To help him of his blindness; And, being help'd, inhabits there.

Then to Silvia let us sing, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;That Silvia is excelling;
She excels each mortal thing &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Upon the dull earth dwelling: To her let us garlands bring.

William Shakespear

Marcellus to Horatio and Bernardo, after seeing the Ghost, Some say that ever 'gainst that season comes
Wherein our Saviour's birth is celebrated, This bird of dawning singeth all night long; And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,
The nights are wholesome, then no planets strike, No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
So hallow'd and so gracious is the time. 


 O, how much more doth beauty beauteous seem By that sweet ornament which truth doth give!
The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem For that sweet odour which doth in it live. The canker-blooms have full as deep a dye As the perfumed tincture of the roses, Hang on such thorns and play as wantonly
When summer's breath their masked buds discloses: But, for their virtue only is their show,
They live unwoo'd and unrespected fade, Die to themselves. Sweet roses do not so;
Of their sweet deaths are sweetest odours made: And so of you, beauteous and lovely youth, When that shall fade, my verse distills your truth.




Double, double toil and trouble; Fire burn and caldron bubble.
Fillet of a fenny snake,
In the caldron boil and bake; Eye of newt and toe of frog, Wool of bat and tongue of dog,
Adder's fork and blind-worm's sting, Lizard's leg and howlet's wing,
For a charm of powerful trouble, Like a hell-broth boil and bubble.

Double, double toil and trouble; Fire burn and caldron bubble.
Cool it with a baboon's blood, Then the charm is firm and good.




From fairest creatures we desire increase, That thereby beauty's rose might never die, But as the riper should by time decease, His tender heir might bear his memory:
But thou, contracted to thine own bright eyes, Feed'st thy light'st flame with self-substantial fuel, Making a famine where abundance lies,
Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel. Thou that art now the world's fresh ornament And only herald to the gaudy spring,
Within thine own bud buriest thy content
And, tender churl, makest waste in niggarding. Pity the world, or else this glutton be,
To eat the world's due, by the grave and thee. 


From fairest creatures we desire increase, That thereby beauty's rose might never die, But as the riper should by time decease, His tender heir might bear his memory;
But thou contracted to thine own bright eyes, Feed'st thy light's flame with self-substantial fuel, Making a famine where abundance lies,
Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel. Thou that art now the world's fresh ornament, And only herald to the gaudy spring,
Within thine own bud buriest thy content, And tender churl mak'st waste in niggarding.
Pity the world, or else this glutton be:
To eat the world's due, by the grave and thee.


To Any

For shame, deny that thou bear'st love to any Who for thy self art so unprovident.
Grant, if thou wilt, thou art beloved of many, But that thou none lov'st is most evident;
For thou art so possessed with murd'rous hate, That 'gainst thy self thou stick'st not to conspire, Seeking that beauteous roof to ruinate
Which to repair should be thy chief desire.
O, change thy thought, that I may change my mind! Shall hate be fairer lodged than gentle love?
Be as thy presence is gracious and kind, Or to thy self at least kind-hearted prove,
Make thee another self, for love of me, That beauty still may live in thine or thee.


Forget'st So Long

Where art thou, Muse, that thou forget'st so long To speak of that which gives thee all thy might? Spend'st thou thy fury on some worthless song, Darkening thy power to lend base subjects light? Return, forgetful Muse, and straight redeem
In gentle numbers time so idly spent; Sing to the ear that doth thy lays esteem,
And gives thy pen both skill and argument. Rise, resty Muse, my love's sweet face survey If time have any wrinkle graven there;
If any, be a satire to decay,
And make time's spoils despis&egrave;d everywhere.
Give my love fame faster than Time wastes life; So thou prevent'st his scythe and crooked knife.


Amends

O truant Muse, what shall be thy amends For thy neglect of truth in beauty dyed? Both truth and beauty on my love depends; So dost thou too, and therein dignified.
Make answer, Muse. Wilt thou not haply say, "Truth needs no colour with his colour fixed, Beauty no pencil, beauty's truth to lay,
But best is best, if never intermixed"?
Because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb? Excuse not silence so, for't lies in thee
To make him much outlive a gilded tomb And to be praised of ages yet to be.
Then do thy office, Muse; I teach thee how
To make him seem, long hence, as he shows now.


Weak In Seeming

My love is strengthened, though more weak in seeming; I love not less, though less the show appear;
That love is merchandized, whose rich esteeming The owner's tongue doth publish everywhere.
Our love was new, and then but in the spring When I was wont to greet it with my lays,
As Philomel in summer's front doth sing,
And stops her pipe in growth of riper days&mdash; Not that the summer is less pleasant now
Than when her mournful hymns did hush the night, But that wild music burthens every bough,
And sweets grown common lose their dear delight.
Therefore like her I sometime hold my tongue, Because I would not dull you with my song.


Forth

Alack, what poverty my Muse brings forth, That having such a scope to show her pride, The argument all bare is of more worth Than when it hath my added praise beside. O, blame me not if I no more can write!
Look in your glass, and there appears a face That overgoes my blunt invention quite, Dulling my lines, and doing me disgrace.
Were it not sinful then striving to mend, To mar the subject that before was well? For to no other pass my verses tend Than of your graces and your gifts to tell;
And more, much more than in my verse can sit, Your own glass shows you when you look in it.




To me, fair friend, you never can be old, For as you were when first your eye I ey'd,
Such seems your beauty still. Three winters cold, Have from the forests shook three summers' pride, Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turn'd, In process of the seasons have I seen,
Three April perfumes in three hot Junes burn'd, Since first I saw you fresh, which yet are green. Ah! yet doth beauty like a dial-hand,
Steal from his figure, and no pace perceiv'd;
So your sweet hue, which methinks still doth stand, Hath motion, and mine eye may be deceiv'd:
For fear of which, hear this thou age unbred: Ere you were born was beauty's summer dead.




Let not my love be called idolatry,
Nor my belov&egrave;d as an idol show, Since all alike my songs and praises be To one, of one, still such, and ever so.
Kind is my love today, tomorrow kind, Still constant in a wondrous excellence; Therefore my verse to constancy confined,
One thing expressing, leaves out difference. "Fair, kind, and true" is all my argument, "Fair, kind, and true" varying to other words; And in this change is my invention spent,
Three themes in one, which wondrous scope affords.
Fair, kind, and true, have often lived alone. Which three till now never kept seat in one.




When in the chronicle of wasted time
I see descriptions of the fairest wights, And beauty making beautiful old rhyme
In praise of ladies dead, and lovely knights, Then, in the blazon of sweet beauty's best, Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow,
I see their antique pen would have expressed Even such a beauty as you master now.
So all their praises are but prophecies Of this our time, all you prefiguring;
And, for they looked but with divining eyes, They had not skill enough your worth to sing.
For we, which now behold these present days, Have eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise.




Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul
Of the wide world dreaming on things to come, Can yet the lease of my true love control, Suppos'd as forfeit to a confin'd doom.
The mortal moon hath her eclipse endur'd And the sad augurs mock their own presage; Incertainties now crown themselves assur'd And peace proclaims olives of endless age.
Now with the drops of this most balmy time
My love looks fresh, and Death to me subscribes, Since, spite of him, I'll live in this poor rhyme, While he insults o'er dull and speechless tribes; And thou in this shalt find thy monument,
When tyrants' crests and tombs of brass are spent. 
Soul

Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul
Of the wide world, dreaming on things to come Can yet the lease of my true love control, Supposed as forfeit to a confined doom.
The mortal moon hath her eclipse endured, And the sad augurs mock their own presage; Incertainties now crown themselves assured, And peace proclaims olives of endless age.
Now with the drops of this most balmy time
My love looks fresh, and Death to me subscribes, Since spite of him I'll live in this poor rhyme, While he insults o'er dull and speechless tribes;
And thou in this shalt find thy monument,
When tyrants' crests and tombs of brass are spent.


Character

What's in the brain that ink may character Which hath not figured to thee my true spirit? What's new to speak, what now to register, That may express my love, or thy dear merit? Nothing, sweet boy, but yet, like prayers divine, I must each day say o'er the very same,
Counting no old thing old&mdash;thou mine, I thine&mdash; Even as when first I hallowed thy fair name.
So that eternal love in love's fresh case Weighs not the dust and injury of age, Nor gives to necessary wrinkles place, But makes antiquity for aye his page,
Finding the first conceit of love there bred
Where time and outward form would show it dead.




O, never say that I was false of heart, Though absence seemed my flame to qualify. As easy might I from my self depart
As from my soul which in thy breast doth lie. That is my home of love; if I have ranged, Like him that travels I return again,
Just to the time, not with the time exchanged, So that myself bring water for my stain.
Never believe though in my nature reigned All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood, That it could so preposterously be stained To leave for nothing all thy sum of good;
For nothing this wide universe I call Save thou, my rose, in it thou art my all.


Grow'st

As fast as thou shalt wane, so fast thou grow'st In one of thine, from that which thou departest,
And that fresh blood which youngly thou bestow'st, Thou mayst call thine when thou from youth convertest. Herein lives wisdom, beauty, and increase;
Without this folly, age, and cold decay,
If all were minded so, the times should cease, And threescore year would make the world away. Let those whom Nature hath not made for store, Harsh, featureless, and rude, barrenly perish;
Look whom she best endowed, she gave the more, Which bounteous gift thou shouldst in bounty cherish.
She carved thee for her seal, and meant thereby, Thou shouldst print more, not let that copy die.


There

Alas, 'tis true, I have gone here and there, And made myself a motley to the view,
Gored mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear, Made old offences of affections new.
Most true it is that I have looked on truth Askance and strangely. But, by all above, These blenches gave my heart another youth, And worse essays proved thee my best of love. Now all is done, have what shall have no end, Mine appetite I never more will grind
On newer proof, to try an older friend, A god in love, to whom I am confined.
Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best, Even to thy pure and most most loving breast.


Chide

O, for my sake do you with Fortune chide, The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds, That did not better for my life provide
Than public means which public manners breeds. Thence comes it that my name receives a brand, And almost thence my nature is subdued
To what it works in, like the dyer's hand. Pity me then, and wish I were renewed, Whilst like a willing patient I will drink Potions of eisel 'gainst my strong infection; No bitterness that I will bitter think,
Nor double penance to correct correction.
Pity me then, dear friend, and I assure ye Even that your pity is enough to cure me.


Fill

Your love and pity doth th' impression fill Which vulgar scandal stamped upon my brow; For what care I who calls me well or ill,
So you o'ergreen my bad, my good allow? You are my all the world, and I must strive
To know my shames and praises from your tongue; None else to me, nor I to none alive,
That my steeled sense or changes, right or wrong. In so profound abysm I throw all care
Of others' voices that my adder's sense
To critic and to flatterer stopp&egrave;d are. Mark how with my neglect I do dispense.
You are so strongly in my purpose bred,
 That all the world besides, methinks, are dead. 


Since I left you, mine eye is in my mind, And that which governs me to go about Doth part his function, and is partly blind, Seems seeing, but effectually is out;
For it no form delivers to the heart
Of bird, of flower, or shape which it doth latch; Of his quick objects hath the mind no part, Nor his own vision holds what it doth catch; For if it see the rud'st or gentlest sight,
The most sweet-favour or deformed'st creature, The mountain or the sea, the day or night,
The crow or dove, it shapes them to your feature.
Incapable of more, replete with you,
My most true mind thus maketh mine untrue.


Crowned With You

Or whether doth my mind, being crowned with you, Drink up the monarch's plague, this flattery?
Or whether shall I say mine eye saith true, And that your love taught it this alchemy, To make of monsters, and things indigest, Such cherubins as your sweet self resemble, Creating every bad a perfect best
As fast as objects to his beams assemble? O, 'tis the first, 'tis flattery in my seeing, And my great mind most kingly drinks it up;
Mine eye well knows what with his gust is 'greeing, And to his palate doth prepare the cup.
If it be poisoned, 'tis the lesser sin
That mine eye loves it and doth first begin.


Lie

Those lines that I before have writ do lie,
Even those that said I could not love you dearer; Yet then my judgment knew no reason why
My most full flame should afterwards burn clearer, But reckoning Time, whose millioned accidents Creep in 'twixt vows, and change decrees of kings, Tan sacred beauty, blunt the sharp'st intents,
Divert strong minds to the course of alt'ring things&mdash; Alas, why, fearing of Time's tyranny,
Might I not then say, "Now I love you best," When I was certain o'er incertainty, Crowning the present, doubting of the rest?
Love is a babe; then might I not say so,
To give full growth to that which still doth grow.


Minds

Let me not to the marriage of true minds Admit impediments. Love is not love Which alters when it alteration finds,
Or bends with the remover to remove. O no, it is an ever-fix&egrave;d mark
That looks on tempests and is never shaken; It is the star to every wand'ring bark,
Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken. Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks Within his bending sickle's compass come;
Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks, But bears it out even to the edge of doom.
If this be error and upon me proved, I never writ, nor no man ever loved.




Like as to make our appetite more keen With eager compounds we our palate urge, As to prevent our maladies unseen,
We sicken to shun sickness when we purge.
Even so being full of your ne'er-cloying sweetness, To bitter sauces did I frame my feeding;
And, sick of welfare, found a kind of meetness To be diseased ere that there was true needing. Thus policy in love t' anticipate
The ills that were not, grew to faults assured, And brought to medicine a healthful state Which, rank of goodness, would by ill be cured.
But thence I learn and find the lesson true: Drugs poison him that so fell sick of you.


Tears

What potions have I drunk of Siren tears, Distilled from limbecks foul as hell within, Applying fears to hopes, and hopes to fears, Still losing when I saw my self to win!
What wretched errors hath my heart committed, Whilst it hath thought it self so bless&egrave;d never! How have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted In the distraction of this madding fever!
O, benefit of ill, now I find true
That better is, by evil still made better; And ruined love, when it is built anew,
Grows fairer than at first, more strong, far greater.
So I return rebuked to my content,
And gain by ills thrice more than I have spent.


Time

When I do count the clock that tells the time, And see the brave day sunk in hideous night; When I behold the violet past prime,
And sable curls all silvered o'er with white; When lofty trees I see barren of leaves Which erst from heat did canopy the herd, And summer's green all girded up in sheaves
Borne on the bier with white and bristly beard, Then of thy beauty do I question make
That thou among the wastes of time must go, Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake And die as fast as they see others grow;
And nothing 'gainst Time's scythe can make defence Save breed, to brave him when he takes thee hence.


Me Now

That you were once unkind befriends me now, And for that sorrow, which I then did feel, Needs must I under my transgression bow,
Unless my nerves were brass or hammered steel. For if you were by my unkindness shaken
As I by yours, y'have passed a hell of time, And I, a tyrant, have no leisure taken
To weigh how once I suffered in your crime.
O, that our night of woe might have remembered My deepest sense how hard true sorrow hits, And soon to you, as you to me then, tendered The humble salve which wounded bosoms fits!
But that your trespass now becomes a fee;
Mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransom me.




'Tis better to be vile than vile esteemed, When not to be receives reproach of being; And the just pleasure lost, which is so deemed Not by our feeling, but by others' seeing:
For why should others' false adulterate eyes Give salutation to my sportive blood?
Or on my frailties why are frailer spies,
Which in their wills count bad what I think good? No, I am that I am, and they that level
At my abuses reckon up their own:
I may be straight though they themselves be bevel; By their rank thoughts, my deeds must not be shown; Unless this general evil they maintain,
All men are bad and in their badness reign. 


Thy gift, thy tables, are within my brain Full charactered with lasting memory, Which shall above that idle rank remain Beyond all date even to eternity&mdash; Or at the least, so long as brain and heart Have faculty by nature to subsist;
Till each to razed oblivion yield his part Of thee, thy record never can be missed.
That poor retention could not so much hold, Nor need I tallies thy dear love to score; Therefore to give them from me was I bold, To trust those tables that receive thee more.
To keep an adjunct to remember thee Were to import forgetfulness in me.


Do Change

No, Time, thou shalt not boast that I do change. Thy pyramids built up with newer might
To me are nothing novel, nothing strange; They are but dressings of a former sight. Our dates are brief, and therefore we admire What thou dost foist upon us that is old,
And rather make them born to our desire
Than think that we before have heard them told. Thy registers and thee I both defy,
Not wond'ring at the present, nor the past, For thy records, and what we see doth lie, Made more or less by thy continual haste:
This I do vow and this shall ever be:
I will be true despite thy scythe and thee.




Were't aught to me I bore the canopy, With my extern the outward honouring, Or laid great bases for eternity,
Which proves more short than waste or ruining? Have I not seen dwellers on form and favour Lose all, and more, by paying too much rent For compound sweet forgoing simple savour, Pitiful thrivers in their gazing spent?
No, let me be obsequious in thy heart, And take thou my oblation, poor but free,
Which is not mixed with seconds, knows no art But mutual render, only me for thee.
Hence, thou suborned informer, a true soul
When most impeached stands least in thy control.


Power

O thou, my lovely boy, who in thy power Dost hold Time's fickle glass his fickle hour;
Who hast by waning grown, and therein show'st Thy lovers withering, as thy sweet self grow'st. If Nature, sovereign mistress over wrack,
As thou goest onwards, still will pluck thee back, She keeps thee to this purpose, that her skill May Time disgrace, and wretched minutes kill.
Yet fear her, O thou minion of her pleasure! She may detain, but not still keep her treasure.
Her audit, though delayed, answered must be, And her quietus is to render thee.


Play'st

How oft, when thou, my music, music play'st,
Upon that bless&egrave;d wood whose motion sounds With thy sweet fingers when thou gently sway'st
The wiry concord that mine ear confounds, Do I envy those jacks that nimble leap
To kiss the tender inward of thy hand,
Whilst my poor lips, which should that harvest reap, At the wood's boldness by thee blushing stand!
To be so tickled, they would change their state And situation with those dancing chips
O'er whom thy fingers walk with gentle gait, Making dead wood more blest than living lips.
Since saucy jacks so happy are in this, Give them thy fingers, me thy lips to kiss.


Shame

Th' expense of spirit in a waste of shame Is lust in action; and, till action, lust
Is perjured, murderous, bloody full of blame, Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust, Enjoyed no sooner but despis&egrave;d straight, Past reason hunted, and no sooner had
Past reason hated as a swallowed bait On purpose laid to make the taker mad. Mad in pursuit, and in possession so;
Had, having, and in quest to have, extreme; A bliss in proof, and proved, a very woe, Before a joy proposed; behind, a dream.
All this the world well knows, yet none knows well To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell.


You Are

O, that you were your self! But, love, you are No longer yours than you yourself here live. Against this coming end you should prepare, And your sweet semblance to some other give. So should that beauty which you hold in lease Find no determination; then you were
Yourself again after yourself's decease,
When your sweet issue your sweet form should bear. Who lets so fair a house fall to decay,
Which husbandry in honour might uphold Against the stormy gusts of winter's day And barren rage of death's eternal cold?
O, none but unthrifts! Dear my love, you know, You had a father; let your son say so.


Sun

My mistress' eyes are nothing like the sun; Coral is far more red than her lips' red;
If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun; If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head. I have seen roses damasked, red and white, But no such roses see I in her cheeks,
And in some perfumes is there more delight Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks. I love to hear her speak, yet well I know,
That music hath a far more pleasing sound. I grant I never saw a goddess go;
My mistress when she walks treads on the ground.
And yet, by heaven, I think my love as rare As any she belied with false compare.




Thou art as tyrannous, so as thou art,
As those whose beauties proudly make them cruel; For well thou know'st to my dear doting heart Thou art the fairest and most precious jewel.
Yet, in good faith, some say that thee behold Thy face hath not the power to make love groan; To say they err I dare not be so bold,
Although I swear it to myself alone. And to be sure that is not false I swear,
A thousand groans but thinking on thy face, One on another's neck do witness bear
Thy black is fairest in my judgment's place.
In nothing art thou black save in thy deeds, And thence this slander, as I think, proceeds.


Me

Thine eyes I love, and they, as pitying me, Knowing thy heart torment me with disdain, Have put on black, and loving mourners be, Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain.
And truly not the morning sun of heaven Better becomes the grey cheeks of the east, Nor that full star that ushers in the even Doth half that glory to the sober west
As those two mourning eyes become thy face. O, let it then as well beseem thy heart
To mourn for me since mourning doth thee grace, And suit thy pity like in every part.
Then will I swear beauty herself is black, And all they foul that thy complexion lack.


Heart To Groan

Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan For that deep wound it gives my friend and me!
Is't not enough to torture me alone,
But slave to slavery my sweet'st friend must be? Me from my self thy cruel eye hath taken,
And my next self thou harder hast engrossed. Of him, myself, and thee I am forsaken&mdash; A torment thrice threefold thus to be crossed.
Prison my heart in thy steel bosom's ward,
But then my friend's heart let my poor heart bail; Whoe'er keeps me, let my heart be his guard, Thou canst not then use rigour in my jail.
And yet thou wilt; for I, being pent in thee, Perforce am thine, and all that is in me.


Thine

So, now I have confessed that he is thine, And I my self am mortgaged to thy will, Myself I'll forfeit, so that other mine
Thou wilt restore to be my comfort still. But thou wilt not, nor he will not be free, For thou art covetous, and he is kind,
He learned but surety-like to write for me Under that bond that him as fist doth bind. The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take, Thou usurer, that putt'st forth all to use, And sue a friend, came debtor for my sake; So him I lose through my unkind abuse.
Him have I lost, thou hast both him and me; He pays the whole, and yet am I not free.


Will

Whoever hath her wish, thou hast thy will, And Will to boot, and Will in overplus; More than enough am I that vex thee still, To thy sweet will making addition thus.
Wilt thou, whose will is large and spacious, Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine? Shall will in others seem right gracious,
And in my will no fair acceptance shine? The sea, all water, yet receives rain still, And in abundance addeth to his store; So thou being rich in will add to thy will
One will of mine to make thy large will more.
Let no unkind, no fair beseechers kill, Think all but one, and me in that one Will.


Near

If thy soul check thee that I come so near, Swear to thy blind soul that I was thy Will, And will thy soul knows is admitted there; Thus far for love, my love suit, sweet, fulfil. Will will fulfil the treasure of thy love,
Ay, fill it full with wills, and my will one.
In things of great receipt with case we prove Among a number one is reckoned none.
Then in the number let me pass untold, Though in thy store's account I one must be; For nothing hold me, so it please thee hold That nothing me, a something, sweet, to thee.
Make but my name thy love, and love that still, And then thou lov'st me for my name is Will.


To Mine Eyes

Thou blind fool, Love, what dost thou to mine eyes That they behold and see not what they see?
They know what beauty is, see where it lies, Yet what the best is, take the worst to be.
If eyes corrupt by overpartial looks,
Be anchored in the bay where all men ride,
Why of eyes' falsehood hast thou forg&egrave;d hooks, Whereto the judgment of my heart is tied?
Why should my heart think that a several plot
Which my heart knows the wide world's common place? Or mine eyes seeing this, say this is not
To put fair truth upon so foul a face?
In things right true my heart and eyes have erred, And to this false plague are they now transferred.


Of Truth

When my love swears that she is made of truth I do believe her, though I know she lies,
That she might think me some untutored youth, Unlearn&egrave;d in the world's false subtleties. Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young, Although she knows my days are past the best, Simply I credit her false-speaking tongue;
On both sides thus is simple truth suppressed. But wherefore says she not she is unjust?
And wherefore say not I that I am old? O, love's best habit is in seeming trust,
And age in love, loves not to have years told. Therefore I lie with her, and she with me, And in our faults by lies we flattered be.




O, call not me to justify the wrong
That thy unkindness lays upon my heart
Wound me not with thine eye but with thy tongue; Use power with power, and slay me not by art.
Tell me thou lov'st elsewhere, but in my sight, Dear heart forbear to glance thine eye aside;
What need'st thou wound with cunning when thy might Is more than my o'erpressed defence can bide?
Let me excuse thee: "Ah, my love well knows, Her pretty looks have been mine enemies,
And therefore from my face she turns my foes, That they elsewhere might dart their injuries."
Yet do not so; but since I am near slain, Kill me outright with looks and rid my pain.


Pluck..."

Not from the stars do I my judgement pluck, And yet methinks I have astronomy,
But not to tell of good, or evil luck,
Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons' quality, Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell; Pointing to each his thunder, rain and wind, Or say with princes if it shall go well
By oft predict that I in heaven find.
But from thine eyes my knowledge I derive, And constant stars in them I read such art As truth and beauty shall together thrive
If from thy self, to store thou wouldst convert: Or else of thee this I prognosticate,
Thy end is truth's and beauty's doom and date. 
Pluck

Not from the stars do I my judgement pluck, And yet methinks I have astronomy&mdash; But not to tell of good or evil luck,
Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons' quality; Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell, 'Pointing to each his thunder, rain, and wind, Or say with princes if it shall go well
By oft predict that I in heaven find.
But from thine eyes my knowledge I derive, And, constant stars, in them I read such art As truth and beauty shall together thrive
If from thy self to store thou wouldst convert; Or else of thee this I prognosticate:
Thy end is truth's and beauty's doom and date.




Be wise as thou art cruel; do not press
My tongue-tied patience with too much disdain, Lest sorrow lend me words and words express The manner of my pity-wanting pain.
If I might teach thee wit, better it were, Though not to love, yet, love, to tell me so, As testy sick men, when their deaths be near,
No news but health from their physicians know. For if I should despair, I should grow mad,
And in my madness might speak ill of thee, Now this ill-wresting world is grown so bad,
Mad slanderers by mad ears believ&egrave;d be.
That I may not be so, nor thou belied,
Bear thine eyes straight, though thy proud heart go wide.


Eyes

In faith, I do not love thee with mine eyes, For they in thee a thousand errors note;
But 'tis my heart that loves what they despise, Who in despite of view is pleased to dote.
Nor are mine cars with thy tongue's tune delighted, Nor tender feeling to base touches prone,
Nor taste, nor smell, desire to be invited To any sensual feast with thee alone; But my five wits, nor my five senses can
Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee, Who leaves unswayed the likeness of a man, Thy proud heart's slave and vassal wretch to be.
Only my plague thus far I count my gain, That she that makes me sin awards me pain.


Hate

Love is my sin, and thy dear virtue hate, Hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving,
O, but with mine, compare thou thine own state, And thou shalt find it merits not reproving,
Or if it do, not from those lips of thine
That have profaned their scarlet ornaments And sealed false bonds of love as oft as mine, Robbed others' beds' revenues of their rents. Be it lawful I love thee as thou lov'st those Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee. Root pity in thy heart, that when it grows
Thy pity may deserve to pitied be.
If thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide, By self-example mayst thou be denied!




Lo, as a careful huswife runs to catch
One of her feathered creatures broke away, Sets down her babe and makes all swift dispatch In pursuit of the thing she would have stay, Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase, Cries to catch her whose busy care is bent
To follow that which flies before her face, Not prizing her poor infant's discontent:
So runn'st thou after that which flies from thee, Whilst I, thy babe, chase thee afar behind;
But if thou catch thy hope turn back to me, And play the mother's part: kiss me, be kind.
So will I pray that thou mayst have thy Will, If thou turn back and my loud crying still.


Despair

Two loves I have, of comfort and despair, Which like two spirits do suggest me still: The better angel is a man right fair,
The worser spirit a woman coloured ill. To win me soon to hell, my female evil Tempteth my better angel from my side, And would corrupt my saint to be a devil, Wooing his purity with her foul pride.
And whether that my angel be turned fiend, Suspect I may, yet not directly tell;
But being both from me both to each friend, I guess one angel in another's hell.
Yet this shall I ne'er know, but live in doubt, Till my bad angel fire my good one out.




Those lips that Love's own hand did make Breath'd forth the sound that said I hate To me that languish'd for her sake:
But when she saw my woeful state, Straight in her heart did mercy come. Chiding that tongue, that ever sweet Was used in giving gentle doom:
And taught it thus anew to greet: 'I hate' she alter'd with an end That follow'd it as gentle day Doth follow night, who like a fiend
From heaven to hell is flown away. 'I hate' from hate away she threw, And sav'd my life, saying 'not you'


Make

Those lips that Love's own hand did make Breathed forth the sound that said "I hate" To me that languished for her sake;
But when she saw my woeful state, Straight in her heart did mercy come, Chiding that tongue that ever sweet Was used in giving gentle doom,
And taught it thus anew to greet: "I hate" she altered with an end, That followed it as gentle day Doth follow night, who like a fiend From heaven to hell is flown away.
"I hate" from hate away she threw, And saved my life, saying "not you."




Poor soul, the centre of my sinful earth, [......] these rebel powers that thee array, Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth, Painting thy outward walls so costly gay?
Why so large cost, having so short a lease, Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend? Shall worms, inheritors of this excess,
Eat up thy charge? Is this thy body's end? Then soul, live thou upon thy servant's loss And let that pine to aggravate thy store; Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross; Within be fed, without be rich no more.
So shalt thou feed on Death, that feeds on men, And, Death once dead, there's no more dying then.




Poor soul, the centre of my sinful earth, My sinful earth these rebel powers array,
Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth, Painting thy outward walls so costly gay?
Why so large cost, having so short a lease, Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend? Shall worms, inheritors of this excess,
Eat up thy charge? is this thy body's end? Then soul live thou upon thy servant's loss, And let that pine to aggravate thy store; Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross; Within be fed, without be rich no more.
So shall thou feed on Death, that feeds on men, And Death once dead, there's no more dying then.




My love is as a fever, longing still
For that which longer nurseth the disease, Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill, Th' uncertain sickly appetite to please.
My reason, the physician to my love, Angry that his prescriptions are not kept, Hath left me, and I desperate now approve Desire is death, which physic did except.
Past cure I am, now reason is past care, And frantic-mad with evermore unrest;
My thoughts and my discourse as mad men's are, At random from the truth vainly expressed.
For I have sworn thee fair, and thought thee bright, Who art as black as hell, as dark as night.


Head

O me! what eyes hath love put in my head, Which have no correspondence with true sight! Or, if they have, where is my judgment fled, That censures falsely what they see aright?
If that be fair whereon my false eyes dote, What means the world to say it is not so? If it be not, then love doth well denote Love's eye is not so true as all men's "no." How can it? O, how can love's eye be true,
That is so vexed with watching and with tears? No marvel then though I mistake my view; The sun it self sees not, 'till heaven clears.
O cunning love, with tears thou keep'st me blind, Lest eyes well-seeing thy foul faults should find.


Not

Canst thou, O cruel, say I love thee not, When I against my self with thee partake? Do I not think on thee when I forgot
Am of my self, all tyrant, for thy sake? Who hateth thee that I do call my friend?
On whom frown'st thou that I do fawn upon? Nay, if thou lour'st on me, do I not spend Revenge upon my self with present moan?
What merit do I in my self respect, That is so proud thy service to despise,
When all my best doth worship thy defect, Commanded by the motion of thine eyes?
But, love, hate on, for now I know thy mind: Those that can see thou lov'st, and I am blind.




When I consider everything that grows Holds in perfection but a little moment,
That this huge stage presenteth nought but shows Whereon the stars in secret influence comment; When I perceive that men as plants increase, Cheered and check'd even by the selfsame sky, Vaunt in their youthful sap, at height decrease, And wear their brave state out of memory;
Then the conceit of this inconstant stay
Sets you most rich in youth before my sight, Where wasteful Time debateth with Decay To change your day of youth to sullied night; And all in war with Time for love of you,
As he takes from you, I engraft you new. 


When I consider every thing that grows Holds in perfection but a little moment.
That this huge stage presenteth nought but shows Whereon the stars in secret influence comment.
When I perceive that men as plants increase, Cheer&egrave;d and checked even by the self-same sky, Vaunt in their youthful sap, at height decrease,
And wear their brave state out of memory; Then the conceit of this inconstant stay, Sets you most rich in youth before my sight, Where wasteful Time debateth with decay To change your day of youth to sullied night;
And all in war with Time for love of you, As he takes from you, I engraft you new.


Powerful Might

O, from what power hast thou this powerful might With insufficiency my heart to sway?
To make me give the lie to my true sight,
And swear that brightness doth not grace the day? Whence hast thou this becoming of things ill,
That in the very refuse of thy deeds
There is such strength and warrantise of skill That, in my mind, thy worst all best exceeds? Who taught thee how to make me love thee more, The more I hear and see just cause of hate?
O, though I love what others do abhor,
With others thou shouldst not abhor my state.
If thy unworthiness raised love in me, More worthy I to be beloved of thee.


Conscience Is

Love is too young to know what conscience is; Yet who knows not conscience is born of love? Then, gentle cheater, urge not my amiss,
Lest guilty of my faults thy sweet self prove. For thou betraying me, I do betray
My nobler part to my gross body's treason; My soul doth tell my body that he may Triumph in love; flesh stays no farther reason, But, rising at thy name, doth point out thee As his triumphant prize. Proud of this pride, He is contented thy poor drudge to be,
To stand in thy affairs, fall by thy side.
No want of conscience hold it that I call,
Her "love" for whose dear love I rise and fall.


Forsworn

In loving thee thou know'st I am forsworn,
But thou art twice forsworn to me love swearing: In act thy bed-vow broke and new faith torn
In vowing new hate after new love bearing. But why of two oaths' breach do I accuse thee, When I break twenty? I am perjured most,
For all my vows are oaths but to misuse thee, And all my honest faith in thee is lost.
For I have sworn deep oaths of thy deep kindness, Oaths of thy love, thy truth, thy constancy,
And to enlighten thee gave eyes to blindness, Or made them swear against the thing they see.
For I have sworn thee fair. More perjured eye, To swear against the truth so foul a lie!




Cupid laid by his brand and fell asleep, A maid of Dian's this advantage found,
And his love-kindling fire did quickly steep In a cold valley-fountain of that ground; Which borrowed from this holy fire of Love A dateless lively heat still to endure,
And grew a seeting bath, which yet men prove Against strange maladies a sovereign cure.
But at my mistress' eye Love's brand new-fired, The boy for trial needs would touch my breast; I, sick withal, the help of bath desired,
And thither hied a sad distempered guest,
But found no cure. The bath for my help lies
Where Cupid got new fire&mdash;my mistress' eyes.




The little love god lying once asleep
Laid by his side his heart-inflaming brand,
Whilst many nymphs that vowed chaste life to keep Came tripping by; but in her maiden hand,
The fairest votary took up that fire
Which many legions of true hearts had warmed, And so the general of hot desire
Was sleeping by a virgin hand disarmed. This brand she quenched in a cool well by, Which from Love's fire took heat perpetual, Growing a bath and healthful remedy,
For men discased; but I, my mistress' thrall, Came there for cure and this by that I prove, Love's fire heats water, water cools not love.




But wherefore do not you a mightier way Make war upon this bloody tyrant, Time, And fortify your self in your decay
With means more bless&egrave;d than my barren rhyme? Now stand you on the top of happy hours,
And many maiden gardens yet unset,
With virtuous wish would bear you living flowers, Much liker than your painted counterfeit:
So should the lines of life that life repair Which this, Time's pencil, or my pupil pen Neither in inward worth nor outward fair Can make you live your self in eyes of men.
To give away your self keeps your self still,
And you must live drawn by your own sweet skill.


Come

Who will believe my verse in time to come If it were filled with your most high deserts?
Though yet heaven knows it is but as a tomb
Which hides your life, and shows not half your parts: If I could write the beauty of your eyes,
And in fresh numbers number all your graces, The age to come would say, "This poet lies,
Such heavenly touches ne'er touched earthly faces." So should my papers, yellowed with their age,
Be scorned like old men of less truth than tongue, And your true rights be termed a poet's rage, And stretch&egrave;d metre of an antique song.
But were some child of yours alive that time, You should live twice, in it and in my rhyme.


Day?

Shall I compare thee to a summer's day? Thou art more lovely and more temperate.
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May, And summer's lease hath all too short a date.
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines, And often is his gold complexion dimmed; And every fair from fair sometime declines,
By chance, or nature's changing course untrimmed. But thy eternal summer shall not fade
Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow'st;
Nor shall death brag thou wand'rest in his shade, When in eternal lines to time thou grow'st,
So long as men can breathe or eyes can see, So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.


Paws

Devouring Time blunt thou the lion's paws,
And make the earth devour her own sweet brood, Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger's jaws, And burn the long-lived phoenix, in her blood, Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleet'st,
And do whate'er thou wilt swift-footed Time To the wide world and all her fading sweets. But I forbid thee one most heinous crime:
O carve not with thy hours my love's fair brow, Nor draw no lines there with thine antique pen, Him in thy course untainted do allow,
For beauty's pattern to succeeding men.
Yet do thy worst old Time: despite thy wrong, My love shall in my verse ever live young.




When forty winters shall besiege thy brow, And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field, Thy youth's proud livery, so gazed on now, Will be a tatter'd weed, of small worth held: Then being ask'd where all thy beauty lies, Where all the treasure of thy lusty days,
To say, within thine own deep-sunken eyes, Were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise.
How much more praise deserved thy beauty's use, If thou couldst answer 'This fair child of mine
Shall sum my count and make my old excuse,' Proving his beauty by succession thine!
This were to be new made when thou art old, And see thy blood warm when thou feel'st it cold.




When forty winters shall besiege thy brow, And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field, Thy youth's proud livery so gazed on now, Will be a tattered weed of small worth held. Then being asked, where all thy beauty lies, Where all the treasure of thy lusty days,
To say within thine own deep sunken eyes, Were an all-eating shame, and thriftless praise.
How much more praise deserved thy beauty's use, If thou couldst answer, "This fair child of mine Shall sum my count, and make my old excuse," Proving his beauty by succession thine.
This were to be new made when thou art old, And see thy blood warm when thou feel'st it cold.


Painted

A woman's face with Nature's own hand painted Hast thou, the master-mistress of my passion; A woman's gentle heart, but not acquainted
With shifting change, as is false women's fashion; An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling, Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth;
A man in hue, all hues in his controlling,
Which steals men's eyes and women's souls amazeth. And for a woman wert thou first created,
Till Nature, as she wrought thee, fell a-doting, And by addition me of thee defeated,
By adding one thing to my purpose nothing.
But since she pricked thee out for women's pleasure, Mine be thy love and thy love's use their treasure.




So is it not with me as with that muse, Stirred by a painted beauty to his verse, Who heaven it self for ornament doth use And every fair with his fair doth rehearse, Making a couplement of proud compare
With sun and moon, with earth and sea's rich gems, With April's first-born flowers, and all things rare That heaven's air in this huge rondure hems.
O, let me, true in love, but truly write, And then, believe me, my love is as fair
As any mother's child, though not so bright As those gold candles fixed in heaven's air.
Let them say more that like of hearsay well; I will not praise that purpose not to sell.




My glass shall not persuade me I am old So long as youth and thou are of one date; But when in thee Time's furrows I behold, Then look I death my days should expiate. For all that beauty that doth cover thee
Is but the seemly raiment of my heart, Which in thy breast doth live, as thine in me. How can I then be elder than thou art?
O, therefore, love, be of thyself so wary As I not for myself, but for thee will,
Bearing thy heart, which I will keep so chary As tender nurse her babe from faring ill.
Presume not on thy heart when mine is slain; Thou gav'st me thine, not to give back again.




As an unperfect actor on the stage
Who with his fear is put beside his part,
Or some fierce thing replete with too much rage, Whose strength's abundance weakens his own heart, So I, for fear of trust, forget to say
The perfect ceremony of love's rite,
And in mine own love's strength seem to decay, O'ercharged with burden of mine own love's might. O, let my books be then the eloquence
And dumb presagers of my speaking breast, Who plead for love, and look for recompense
More than that tongue that more hath more expressed.
O, learn to read what silent love hath writ, To hear with eyes belongs to love's fine wit.


Hath Stelled..."

Mine eye hath played the painter and hath stelled, Thy beauty's form in table of my heart,
My body is the frame wherein 'tis held, And perspective it is best painter's art.
For through the painter must you see his skill, To find where your true image pictured lies, Which in my bosom's shop is hanging still, That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes:
Now see what good turns eyes for eyes have done, Mine eyes have drawn thy shape, and thine for me Are windows to my breast, where-through the sun Delights to peep, to gaze therein on thee;
Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art, They draw but what they see, know not the heart.


Hath Stelled

Mine eye hath played the painter and hath stelled Thy beauty's form in table of my heart;
My body is the frame wherein 'tis held, And perspective it is best painter's art.
For through the painter must you see his skill To find where your true image pictured lies, Which in my bosom's shop is hanging still,
That hath his windows glaz&egrave;d with thine eyes. Now see what good turns eyes for eyes have done: Mine eyes have drawn thy shape, and thine for me Are windows to my breast, where-through the sun Delights to peep, to gaze therein on thee.
Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art: They draw but what they see, know not the heart.


Stars

Let those who are in favour with their stars Of public honour and proud titles boast, Whilst I, whom fortune of such triumph bars, Unlooked for joy in that I honour most.
Great princes' favourites their fair leaves spread, But as the marigold at the sun's eye,
And in themselves their pride lies buri&egrave;d, For at a frown they in their glory die.
The painful warrior famous&egrave;d for fight, After a thousand victories once foiled,
Is from the book of honour raz&egrave;d quite, And all the rest forgot for which he toiled.
Then happy I that love and am beloved Where I may not remove nor be removed.




Lord of my love, to whom in vassalage Thy merit hath my duty strongly knit; To thee I send this written embassage To witness duty, not to show my wit.
Duty so great, which wit so poor as mine
May make seem bare, in wanting words to show it; But that I hope some good conceit of thine
In thy soul's thought (all naked) will bestow it: Till whatsoever star that guides my moving, Points on me graciously with fair aspect,
And puts apparel on my tattered loving, To show me worthy of thy sweet respect,
Then may I dare to boast how I do love thee,
Till then, not show my head where thou mayst prove me. 


Weary with toil, I haste me to my bed,
The dear respose for limbs with travel tir&egrave;d; But then begins a journey in my head
To work my mind, when body's work's expir&egrave;d. For then my thoughts, from far where I abide,
Intend a zealous pilgrimage to thee,
And keep my drooping eyelids open wide, Looking on darkness which the blind do see; Save that my soul's imaginary sight Presents thy shadow to my sightless view, Which like a jewel, hung in ghastly night,
Makes black night beauteous, and her old face new.
Lo thus by day my limbs, by night my mind, For thee and for myself no quiet find.




How can I then return in happy plight That am debarred the benefit of rest?
When day's oppression is not eased by night, But day by night, and night by day oppressed? And each, though enemies to either's reign, Do in consent shake hands to torture me,
The one by toil, the other to complain How far I toil, still farther off from thee.
I tell the day, to please him, thou art bright
And dost him grace when clouds do blot the heaven; So flatter I the swart-complexioned night,
When sparkling stars twire not thou gild'st the even.
But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer,
And night doth nightly make grief's length seem stronger.


Thought

When to the sessions of sweet silent thought I summon up remembrance of things past,
I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought,
And with old woes new wail my dear time's waste. Then can I drown an eye, unused to flow,
For precious friends hid in death's dateless night, And weep afresh love's long since cancelled woe, And moan th' expense of many a vanished sight. Then can I grieve at grievances foregone,
And heavily from woe to woe tell o'er
The sad account of fore-bemoan&egrave;d moan, Which I new pay as if not paid before.
But if the while I think on thee, dear friend, All losses are restored and sorrows end.


Hearts

Thy bosom is endear&egrave;d with all hearts, Which I by lacking have suppos&egrave;d dead, And there reigns love and all love's loving parts, And all those friends which I thought buri&egrave;d. How many a holy and obsequious tear
Hath dear religious love stol'n from mine eye As interest of the dead, which now appear But things removed that hidden in thee lie!
Thou art the grave where buried love doth live, Hung with the trophies of my lovers gone,
Who all their parts of me to thee did give; That due of many now is thine alone.
Their images I loved, I view in thee, And thou, all they, hast all the all of me.




If thou survive my well-contented day
When that churl Death my bones with dust shall cover, And shalt by fortune once more re-survey
These poor rude lines of thy deceas&egrave;d lover, Compare them with the bett'ring of the time,
And though they be outstripped by every pen, Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme, Exceeded by the height of happier men.
O, then vouchsafe me but this loving thought:
"Had my friend's Muse grown with this growing age, A dearer birth than this his love had brought
To march in ranks of better equipage;
But since he died and poets better prove, Theirs for their style I'll read, his for his love."




Full many a glorious morning have I seen Flatter the mountaintops with sovereign eye, Kissing with golden face the meadows green, Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy; Anon permit the basest clouds to ride
With ugly rack on his celestial face,
And from the forlorn world his visage hide, Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace. Even so my sun one early morn did shine With all-triumphant splendour on my brow. But out, alack! He was but one hour mine;
The region cloud hath masked him from me now.
Yet him for this my love no whit disdaineth;
Suns of the world may stain when heaven's sun staineth.


Beauteous Day

Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day And make me travel forth without my cloak, To let base clouds o'ertake me in my way, Hiding thy brav'ry in their rotten smoke?
'Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break, To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face,
For no man well of such a salve can speak
That heals the wound and cures not the disgrace. Nor can thy shame give physic to my grief; Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss.
Th' offender's sorrow lends but weak relief To him that bears the strong offence's cross.
Ah, but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds, And they are rich, and ransom all ill deeds.


Hast Done

No more be grieved at that which thou hast done. Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud, Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun, And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud.
All men make faults, and even I in this, Authorizing thy trespass with compare, Myself corrupting, salving thy amiss, Excusing thy sins more than thy sins are.
For to thy sensual fault I bring in sense&mdash; Thy adverse party is thy advocate&mdash;
And 'gainst my self a lawful plea commence. Such civil war is in my love and hate
That I an accessary needs must be
To that sweet thief which sourly robs from me.


Twain

Let me confess that we two must be twain, Although our undivided loves are one;
So shall those blots that do with me remain, Without thy help, by me be borne alone.
In our two loves there is but one respect, Though in our lives a separable spite, Which, though it alter not love's sole effect,
Yet doth it steal sweet hours from love's delight. I may not evermore acknowledge thee,
Lest my bewail&egrave;d guilt should do thee shame, Nor thou with public kindness honour me
Unless thou take that honour from thy name.
But do not so; I love thee in such sort
As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report.




As a decrepit father takes delight
To see his active child do deeds of youth, So I, made lame by Fortune's dearest spite, Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth. For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit, Or any of these all, or all, or more,
Entitled in thy parts, do crown&egrave;d sit, I make my love engrafted to this store.
So then I am not lame, poor, nor despised, Whilst that this shadow doth such substance give That I in thy abundance am sufficed
And by a part of all thy glory live.
Look what is best, that best I wish in thee. This wish I have; then ten times happy me!




How can my muse want subject to invent,
While thou dost breathe, that pour'st into my verse Thine own sweet argument, too excellent
For every vulgar paper to rehearse?
O! give thy self the thanks, if aught in me Worthy perusal stand against thy sight;
For who's so dumb that cannot write to thee, When thou thy self dost give invention light?
Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth Than those old nine which rhymers invocate; And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth Eternal numbers to outlive long date.
If my slight muse do please these curious days, The pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise.




How can my Muse want subject to invent
While thou dost breathe, that pour'st into my verse Thine own sweet argument, too excellent
For every vulgar paper to rehearse?
O, give thyself the thanks, if aught in me Worthy perusal stand against thy sight,
For who's so dumb that cannot write to thee, When thou thyself dost give invention light?
Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth Than those old nine which rhymers invocate; And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth Eternal numbers to outlive long date.
If my slight Muse do please these curious days, The pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise.


Sing

O, how thy worth with manners may I sing, When thou art all the better part of me?
What can mine own praise to mine own self bring? And what is't but mine own when I praise thee?
Even for this let us divided live,
And our dear love lose name of single one, That by this separation I may give
That due to thee which thou deserv'st alone.
O, absence what a torment wouldst thou prove, Were it not thy sour leisure gave sweet leave To entertain the time with thoughts of love,
Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive, And that thou teachest how to make one twain By praising him here who doth hence remain!




Unthrifty loveliness, why dost thou spend Upon thy self thy beauty's legacy?
Nature's bequest gives nothing, but doth lend, And being frank she lends to those are free.
Then, beauteous niggard why dost thou abuse, The bounteous largess given thee to give?
Profitless usurer, why dost thou use
So great a sum of sums yet canst not live? For having traffic with thyself alone,
Thou of thyself thy sweet self dost deceive. Then how when nature calls thee to be gone, What acceptable audit canst thou leave?
Thy unused beauty must be tombed with thee, Which us&egrave;d, lives th' executor to be.


Them All

Take all my loves, my love, yea, take them all; What hast thou then more than thou hadst before? No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call; All mine was thine, before thou hadst this more.
Then if for my love, thou my love receivest, I cannot blame thee, for my love thou usest; But yet be blamed, if thou thy self deceivest By wilful taste of what thy self refusest.
I do forgive thy robbery, gentle thief, Although thou steal thee all my poverty; And yet love knows it is a greater grief
To bear love's wrong, than hate's known injury.
Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows, Kill me with spites; yet we must not be foes.


Commits

Those pretty wrongs that liberty commits When I am sometime absent from thy heart, Thy beauty and thy years full well befits,
For still temptation follows where thou art. Gentle thou art, and therefore to be won; Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assailed; And when a woman woos, what woman's son Will sourly leave her till he have prevailed?
Ay me, but yet thou mightst my seat forbear, And chide thy beauty and thy straying youth, Who lead thee in their riot even there
Where thou art forced to break a twofold truth: Hers, by thy beauty tempting her to thee, Thine, by thy beauty being false to me.




That thou hast her, it is not all my grief, And yet it may be said I loved her dearly; That she hath thee is of my wailing chief,
A loss in love that touches me more nearly. Loving offenders, thus I will excuse ye:
Thou dost love her because thou know'st I love her, And for my sake even so doth she abuse me, Suff'ring my friend for my sake to approve her.
If I lose thee, my loss is my love's gain,
And, losing her, my friend hath found that loss; Both find each other, and I lose both twain, And both for my sake lay on me this cross.
But here's the joy: my friend and I are one, Sweet flattery! Then she loves but me alone.


Best See

When most I wink, then do mine eyes best see, For all the day they view things unrespected; But when I sleep, in dreams they look on thee, And darkly bright, are bright in dark directed.
Then thou, whose shadow shadows doth make bright, How would thy shadow's form, form happy show
To the clear day with thy much clearer light, When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so!
How would, I say, mine eyes be bless&egrave;d made, By looking on thee in the living day,
When in dead night thy fair imperfect shade Through heavy sleep on sightless eyes doth stay!
All days are nights to see till I see thee,
And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me.


Thought

If the dull substance of my flesh were thought, Injurious distance should not stop my way; For then despite of space I would be brought, From limits far remote, where thou dost stay. No matter then although my foot did stand Upon the farthest earth removed from thee;
For nimble thought can jump both sea and land As soon as think the place where he would be. But, ah, thought kills me that I am not thought, To leap large lengths of miles when thou art gone, But that, so much of earth and water wrought,
I must attend time's leisure with my moan, Receiving nought by elements so slow, But heavy tears, badges of either's woe.




The other two, slight air and purging fire, Are both with thee, wherever I abide;
The first my thought, the other my desire, These present-absent with swift motion slide. For when these quicker elements are gone
In tender embassy of love to thee,
My life, being made of four, with two alone
Sinks down to death, oppressed with melancholy; Until life's composition be recured
By those swift messengers returned from thee, Who even but now come back again, assured Of thy fair health, recounting it to me.
This told, I joy; but then no longer glad,
I send them back again and straight grow sad.




Mine eye and heart are at a mortal war How to divide the conquest of thy sight;
Mine eye my heart thy picture's sight would bar, My heart mine eye the freedom of that right,
My heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie&mdash; A closet never pierced with crystal eyes&mdash;
But the defendant doth that plea deny, And says in him thy fair appearance lies. To 'cide this title is impanell&egrave;d
A quest of thoughts, all tenants to the heart, And by their verdict is determin&egrave;d
The clear eye's moiety, and the dear heart's part.
As thus, mine eye's due is thy outward part, And my heart's right thy inward love of heart.


Took

Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is took, And each doth good turns now unto the other, When that mine eye is famished for a look,
Or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother, With my love's picture then my eye doth feast And to the painted banquet bids my heart; Another time mine eye is my heart's guest,
And in his thoughts of love doth share a part. So, either by thy picture or my love,
Thyself, away, art present still with me;
For thou not farther than my thoughts canst move, And I am still with them, and they with thee;
Or, if they sleep, thy picture in my sight Awakes my heart to heart's and eye's delight.




How careful was I, when I took my way, Each trifle under truest bars to thrust,
That to my use it might unus&egrave;d stay From hands of falsehood, in sure wards of trust! But thou, to whom my jewels trifles are,
Most worthy comfort, now my greatest grief, Thou best of dearest, and mine only care, Art left the prey of every vulgar thief.
Thee have I not locked up in any chest,
Save where thou art not&mdash;though I feel thou art&mdash; Within the gentle closure of my breast,
From whence at pleasure thou mayst come and part; And even thence thou wilt be stol'n, I fear,
For truth proves thievish for a prize so dear.


Come

Against that time, if ever that time come, When I shall see thee frown on my defects, When as thy love hath cast his utmost sum, Called to that audit by advised respects;
Against that time when thou shalt strangely pass, And scarcely greet me with that sun, thine eye, When love, converted from the thing it was,
Shall reasons find of settled gravity&mdash; Against that time do I ensconce me here Within the knowledge of mine own desart, And this my hand, against myself uprear, To guard the lawful reasons on thy part.
To leave poor me thou hast the strength of laws, Since why to love I can allege no cause.


Frame

Those hours, that with gentle work did frame The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell, Will play the tyrants to the very same
And that unfair which fairly doth excel; For never-resting Time leads summer on
To hideous winter and confounds him there,
Sap checked with frost and lusty leaves quite gone, Beauty o'ersnowed and bareness everywhere.
Then, were not summer's distillation left A liquid prisoner pent in walls of glass, Beauty's effect with beauty were bereft, Nor it nor no remembrance what it was.
But flowers distilled, though they with winter meet, Leese but their show; their substance still lives sweet.




How heavy do I journey on the way, When what I seek, my weary travel's end,
Doth teach that case and that repose to say, "Thus far the miles are measured from thy friend!" The beast that bears me, tired with my woe,
Plods dully on, to bear that weight in me, As if by some instinct the wretch did know
His rider loved not speed being made from thee. The bloody spur cannot provoke him on
That sometimes anger thrusts into his hide, Which heavily he answers with a groan, More sharp to me than spurring to his side;
For that same groan doth put this in my mind: My grief lies onward and my joy behind.


Offence

Thus can my love excuse the slow offence Of my dull bearer, when from thee I speed:
From where thou art, why should I haste me thence? Till I return, of posting is no need.
O, what excuse will my poor beast then find When swift extremity can seem but slow?
Then should I spur, though mounted on the wind; In wing&egrave;d speed no motion shall I know. Then can no horse with my desire keep pace; Therefore desire, of perfect'st love being made,
Shall neigh&mdash;no dull flesh&mdash;in his fiery race. But love, for love, thus shall excuse my jade:
Since from thee going he went wilful-slow, Towards thee I'll run, and give him leave to go.


Bless&Egrave;D Key

So am I as the rich whose bless&egrave;d key
Can bring him to his sweet up-lock&egrave;d treasure, The which he will not every hour survey,
For blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure. Therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare, Since, seldom coming, in that long year set,
Like stones of worth they thinly plac&egrave;d are, Or captain jewels in the carcanet.
So is the time that keeps you as my chest, Or as the wardrobe which the robe doth hide, To make some special instant special-blest By new unfolding his imprisoned pride.
Bless&egrave;d are you whose worthiness gives scope, Being had to triumph, being lacked to hope.


Made

What is your substance, whereof are you made, That millions of strange shadows on you tend? Since everyone hath, every one, one shade, And you, but one, can every shadow lend.
Describe Adonis, and the counterfeit Is poorly imitated after you;
On Helen's cheek all art of beauty set, And you in Grecian tires are painted new.
Speak of the spring, and foison of the year; The one doth shadow of your beauty show, The other as your bounty doth appear,
And you in every bless&egrave;d shape we know.
In all external grace you have some part,
But you like none, none you, for constant heart.


Beauteous Seem

O, how much more doth beauty beauteous seem By that sweet ornament which truth doth give!
The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem For that sweet odour which doth in it live. The canker blooms have full as deep a dye
As the perfum&egrave;d tincture of the roses, Hang on such thorns, and play as wantonly
When summer's breath their mask&egrave;d buds discloses; But, for their virtue only is their show,
They live unwooed and unrespected fade, Die to themselves. Sweet roses do not so;
Of their sweet deaths are sweetest odours made.
And so of you, beauteous and lovely youth, When that shall vade, by verse distills your truth.




Not marble, nor the gilded monuments
Of princes shall outlive this powerful rhyme,
But you shall shine more bright in these contents Than unswept stone besmeared with sluttish time. When wasteful war shall statues overturn,
And broils root out the work of masonry,
Nor Mars his sword, nor war's quick fire shall burn The living record of your memory.
'Gainst death and all-oblivious enmity
Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room Even in the eyes of all posterity
That wear this world out to the ending doom.
So, till the judgment that yourself arise, You live in this, and dwell in lovers' eyes.


Said

Sweet love, renew thy force! Be it not said Thy edge should blunter be than appetite, Which but today by feeding is allayed, Tomorrow sharpened in his former might. So, love, be thou, although today thou fill
Thy hungry eyes, even till they wink with fulness, Tomorrow see again, and do not kill
The spirit of love with a perpetual dullness. Let this sad interim like the ocean be
Which parts the shore where two contracted new Come daily to the banks, that, when they see Return of love, more blest may be the view;
As call it winter, which being full of care
Makes summer's welcome thrice more wished, more rare.


Tend

Being your slave, what should I do but tend Upon the hours and times of your desire?
I have no precious time at all to spend, Nor services to do, till you require.
Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour, Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for you, Nor think the bitterness of absence sour
When you have bid your servant once adieu. Nor dare I question with my jealous thought Where you may be, or your affairs suppose, But, like a sad slave, stay and think of naught
Save where you are, how happy you make those.
So true a fool is love that in your will, Though you do any thing, he thinks no ill.


Slave

That god forbid, that made me first your slave,
I should in thought control your times of pleasure, Or at your hand th' account of hours to crave, Being your vassal bound to stay your leisure!
O, let me suffer, being at your beck, Th' imprisoned absence of your liberty,
And patience tame to sufferance, bide each check, Without accusing you of injury.
Be where you list, your charter is so strong That you your self may privilage your time To what you will; to you it doth belong Your self to pardon of self-doing crime.
I am to wait, though waiting so be hell, Not blame your pleasure, be it ill or well.


Is

If there be nothing new, but that which is
Hath been before, how are our brains beguiled, Which, labouring for invention bear amis
The second burthen of a former child!
O, that record could with a backward look, Even of five hundred courses of the sun, Show me your image in some antique book, Since mind at first in character was done.
That I might see what the old world could say To this compos&egrave;d wonder of your frame; Whether we are mended, or whe'er better they, Or whether revolution be the same.
O, sure I am the wits of former days
To subjects worse have given admiring praise.




Then let not winter's ragged hand deface In thee thy summer ere thou be distilled.
Make sweet some vial; treasure thou some place With beauty's treasure ere it be self-killed.
That use is not forbidden usury
Which happies those that pay the willing loan; That's for thyself to breed another thee,
Or ten times happier, be it ten for one,
Ten times thy self were happier than thou art, If ten of thine ten times refigured thee;
Then what could death do, if thou shouldst depart, Leaving thee living in posterity?
Be not self-willed, for thou art much too fair
To be death's conquest and make worms thine heir.


Pebbled Shore

Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore, So do our minutes hasten to their end;
Each changing place with that which goes before, In sequent toil all forwards do contend.
Nativity once in the main of light,
Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crowned, Crook&egrave;d eclipses 'gainst his glory fight, And Time that gave doth now his gift confound. Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth, And delves the parallels in beauty's brow, Feeds on the rarities of nature's truth,
And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow.
And yet to times in hope my verse shall stand, Praising thy worth despite his cruel hand.


Open

Is it thy will thy image should keep open My heavy eyelids to the weary night?
Dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken While shadows like to thee do mock my sight?
Is it thy spirit that thou send'st from thee So far from home into my deeds to pry, To find out shames and idle hours in me, The scope and tenure of thy jealousy?
O, no, thy love, though much, is not so great; It is my love that keeps mine eye awake, Mine own true love that doth my rest defeat, To play the watchman ever for thy sake.
For thee watch I whilst thou dost wake elsewhere, From me far off, with others all too near.




Sin of self-love possesseth all mine eye, And all my soul, and all my every part; And for this sin there is no remedy,
It is so grounded inward in my heart. Methinks no face so gracious is as mine, No shape so true, no truth of such account; And for my self mine own worth do define, As I all other in all worths surmount.
But when my glass shows me myself indeed Beated and chapped with tanned antiquity, Mine own self-love quite contrary I read; Self so self-loving were iniquity.
'Tis thee, myself, that for my self I praise, Painting my age with beauty of thy days.




Against my love shall be as I am now
With Time's injurious hand crushed and o'erworn, When hours have drained his blood and filled his brow With lines and wrinkles, when his youthful morn
Hath travelled on to age's steepy night,
And all those beauties whereof now he's king Are vanishing, or vanished out of sight, Stealing away the treasure of his spring:
For such a time do I now fortify Against confounding age's cruel knife, That he shall never cut from memory
My sweet love's beauty, though my lover's life. His beauty shall in these black lines be seen, And they shall live, and he in them still green.




Against my love shall be, as I am now,
With Time's injurious hand crushed and o'erworn; When hours have drained his blood and filled his brow With lines and wrinkles; when his youthful morn
Hath travelled on to age's steepy night,
And all those beauties whereof now he's king Are vanishing, or vanished out of sight, Stealing away the treasure of his spring;
For such a time do I now fortify Against confounding age's cruel knife, That he shall never cut from memory
My sweet love's beauty, though my lover's life. His beauty shall in these black lines be seen, And they shall live, and he in them still green.


Defaced

When I have seen by Time's fell hand defaced The rich-proud cost of outworn buried age; When sometime lofty towers I see down-razed And brass eternal slave to mortal rage;
When I have seen the hungry ocean gain Advantage on the kingdom of the shore, And the firm soil win of the watery main,
Increasing store with loss, and loss with store; When I have seen such interchange of state, Or state it self confounded to decay,
Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate
That Time will come and take my love away.
This thought is as a death which cannot choose But weep to have that which it fears to lose.


Boundless Sea

Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea, But sad mortality o'ersways their power,
How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea, Whose action is no stronger than a flower? O, how shall summer's honey breath hold out Against the wrackful siege of batt'ring days, When rocks impregnable are not so stout,
Nor gates of steel so strong but Time decays? O, fearful meditation! Where, alack,
Shall Time's best jewel from Time's chest lie hid? Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back? Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?
O, none, unless this miracle have might,
That in black ink my love may still shine bright.


Cry

Tired with all these, for restful death I cry, As to behold desert a beggar born,
And needy nothing trimmed in jollity, And purest faith unhappily forsworn, And gilded honour shamefully misplaced, And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted,
And right perfection wrongfully disgraced,
And strength by limping sway disabl&egrave;d And art made tongue-tied by authority,
And folly doctor-like controlling skill, And simple truth miscalled simplicity, And captive good attending captain ill.
Tired with all these, from these would I be gone, Save that to die, I leave my love alone.


Live

Ah, wherefore with infection should he live, And with his presence grace impiety,
That sin by him advantage should achieve, And lace it self with his society?
Why should false painting imitate his cheek, And steal dead seeming of his living hue?
Why should poor beauty indirectly seek Roses of shadow, since his rose is true? Why should he live, now Nature bankrupt is,
Beggared of blood to blush through lively veins, For she hath no exchequer now but his,
And proud of many, lives upon his gains?
O, him she stores, to show what wealth she had In days long since, before these last so bad.


Doth View

Those parts of thee that the world's eye doth view Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend; All tongues, the voice of souls, give thee that due, Utt'ring bare truth, even so as foes commend.
Thy outward thus with outward praise is crowned, But those same tongues that give thee so thine own In other accents do this praise confound
By seeing farther than the eye hath shown. They look into the beauty of thy mind,
And that, in guess, they measure by thy deeds;
Then churls their thoughts, although their eyes were kind, To thy fair flower add the rank smell of weeds.
But why thy odour matcheth not thy show, The soil is this, that thou dost common grow.


Light..."

Lo in the orient when the gracious light Lifts up his burning head, each under eye Doth homage to his new-appearing sight, Serving with looks his sacred majesty,
And having climbed the steep-up heavenly hill, Resembling strong youth in his middle age, Yet mortal looks adore his beauty still, Attending on his golden pilgrimage:
But when from highmost pitch with weary car, Like feeble age he reeleth from the day,
The eyes (fore duteous) now converted are From his low tract and look another way: So thou, thy self out-going in thy noon: Unlooked on diest unless thou get a son.




Lo, in the orient when the gracious light Lifts up his burning head, each under eye Doth homage to his new-appearing sight, Serving with looks his sacred majesty;
And having climbed the steep-up heavenly hill, Resembling strong youth in his middle age, Yet mortal looks adore his beauty still, Attending on his golden pilgrimage;
But when from highmost pitch, with weary car, Like feeble age, he reeleth from the day,
The eyes, 'fore duteous, now converted are From his low tract and look another way.
So thou, thyself outgoing in thy noon, Unlooked on diest, unless thou get a son.




That thou art blamed shall not be thy defect, For slander's mark was ever yet the fair; The ornament of beauty is suspect,
A crow that flies in heaven's sweetest air. So thou be good, slander doth but approve Thy worth the greater being wooed of time, For canker vice the sweetest buds doth love,
And thou present'st a pure unstain&egrave;d prime. Thou hast passed by the ambush of young days, Either not assailed, or victor being charged;
Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise, To tie up envy, evermore enlarged.
If some suspect of ill masked not thy show,
Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe.




That thou art blamed shall not be thy defect, For slander's mark was ever yet the fair, The ornament of beauty is suspect,
A crow that flies in heaven's sweetest air. So thou be good, slander doth but approve, Thy worth the greater being wooed of time, For canker vice the sweetest buds doth love, And thou present'st a pure unstained prime.
Thou hast passed by the ambush of young days, Either not assailed, or victor being charged,
Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise, To tie up envy, evermore enlarged,
If some suspect of ill masked not thy show,
Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe. 


No longer mourn for me when I am dead Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell Give warning to the world that I am fled
From this vile world with vilest worms to dwell. Nay if you read this line, remember not
The hand that writ it, for I love you so
That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot If thinking on me then should make you woe. O, if, I say, you look upon this verse,
When I perhaps compounded am with clay, Do not so much as my poor name rehearse, But let your love even with my life decay,
Lest the wise world should look into your moan And mock you with me after I am gone.


Recite

O, lest the world should task you to recite What merit lived in me that you should love After my death, dear love, forget me quite;
For you in me can nothing worthy prove&mdash; Unless you would devise some virtuous lie
To do more for me than mine own desert,
And hang more praise upon deceas&egrave;d I Than niggard truth would willingly impart.
O, lest your true love may seem false in this, That you for love speak well of me untrue, My name be buried where my body is,
And live no more to shame nor me nor you.
For I am shamed by that which I bring forth, And so should you, to love things nothing worth.


Behold

That time of year thou mayst in me behold, When yellow leaves, or none, or few do hang Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,
Bare ruined choirs where late the sweet birds sang. In me thou seest the twilight of such day
As after sunset fadeth in the west,
Which by and by black night doth take away, Death's second self that seals up all in rest. In me thou seest the glowing of such fire That on the ashes of his youth doth lie
As the death-bed whereon it must expire, Consumed with that which it was nourished by.
This thou perceiv'st, which makes thy love more strong, To love that well which thou must leave ere long.




But be contented when that fell arrest Without all bail shall carry me away; My life hath in this line some interest,
Which for memorial still with thee shall stay. When thou reviewest this, thou dost review The very part was consecrate to thee,
The earth can have but earth, which is his due; My spirit is thine the better part of me.
So then thou hast but lost the dregs of life, The prey of worms, my body being dead, The coward conquest of a wretch's knife, Too base of thee to be remember&egrave;d,
The worth of that is that which it contains, And that is this, and this with thee remains.


Life

So are you to my thoughts as food to life,
Or as sweet-seasoned showers are to the ground; And for the peace of you I hold such strife
As 'twixt a miser and his wealth is found. Now proud as an enjoyer, and anon
Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure; Now counting best to be with you alone,
Then bettered that the world may see my pleasure; Sometimes all full with feasting on your sight,
And by and by clean starv&egrave;d for a look; Possessing or pursuing no delight
Save what is had, or must from you be took.
Thus do I pine and surfeit day by day, Or gluttoning on all, or all away.




Why is my verse so barren of new pride? So far from variation or quick change?
Why with the time do I not glance aside
To new-found methods, and to compounds strange? Why write I still all one, ever the same,
And keep invention in a noted weed,
That every word doth almost tell my name, Showing their birth and where they did proceed? O, know, sweet love, I always write of you,
And you and love are still my argument; So all my best is dressing old words new, Spending again what is already spent.
For as the sun is daily new and old, So is my love still telling what is told.


Beauties Wear

Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear, Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste;
These vacant leaves thy mind's imprint will bear, And of this book, this learning mayst thou taste. The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show
Of mouth&egrave;d graves will give thee memory, Thou by thy dial's shady stealth mayst know Time's thievish progress to eternity.
Look what thy memory cannot contain,
Commit to these waste blanks, and thou shalt find Those children nursed, delivered from thy brain, To take a new acquaintance of thy mind.
These offices, so oft as thou wilt look,
Shall profit thee and much enrich thy book.




So oft have I invoked thee for my Muse, And found such fair assistance in my verse As every alien pen hath got my use,
And under thee their poesy disperse.
Thine eyes, that taught the dumb on high to sing, And heavy ignorance aloft to fly,
Have added feathers to the learn&egrave;d's wing And given grace a double majesty.
Yet be most proud of that which I compile, Whose influence is thine, and born of thee.
In others' works thou dost but mend the style, And arts with thy sweet graces grac&egrave;d be.
But thou art all my art, and dost advance As high as learning my rude ignorance.




Whilst I alone did call upon thy aid,
My verse alone had all thy gentle grace, But now my gracious numbers are decayed, And my sick Muse doth give an other place. I grant, sweet love, thy lovely argument Deserves the travail of a worthier pen,
Yet what of thee thy poet doth invent He robs thee of, and pays it thee again.
He lends thee virtue, and he stole that word From thy behaviour; beauty doth he give, And found it in thy cheek; he can afford
No praise to thee, but what in thee doth live.
Then thank him not for that which he doth say, Since what he owes thee, thou thyself dost pay.


Sadly?

Music to hear, why hear'st thou music sadly? Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy. Why lov'st thou that which thou receiv'st not gladly, Or else receiv'st with pleasure thine annoy?
If the true concord of well-tun&egrave;d sounds, By unions married, do offend thine ear,
They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds In singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear. Mark how one string, sweet husband to another, Strikes each in each by mutual ordering, Resembling sire and child and happy mother, Who, all in one, one pleasing note do sing;
Whose speechless song being many, seeming one, Sings this to thee: "Thou single wilt prove none."




O, how I faint when I of you do write, Knowing a better spirit doth use your name, And in the praise thereof spends all his might
To make me tongue-tied speaking of your fame. But since your worth, wide as the ocean is,
The humble as the proudest sail doth bear, My saucy bark, inferior far to his,
On your broad main doth wilfully appear. Your shallowest help will hold me up afloat,
Whilst he upon your soundless deep doth ride; Or, being wrecked, I am a worthless boat,
He of tall building, and of goodly pride. Then if he thrive and I be cast away,
The worst was this: my love was my decay.




Or I shall live your epitaph to make,
Or you survive when I in earth am rotten, From hence your memory death cannot take, Although in me each part will be forgotten.
Your name from hence immortal life shall have, Though I, once gone, to all the world must die; The earth can yield me but a common grave,
When you entomb&egrave;d in men's eyes shall lie. Your monument shall be my gentle verse,
Which eyes not yet created shall o'er-read, And tongues to be your being shall rehearse When all the breathers of this world are dead.
You still shall live&mdash;such virtue hath my pen&mdash; Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men.


Muse

I grant thou wert not married to my Muse, And therefore mayst without attaint o'erlook The dedicated words which writers use
Of their fair subject, blessing every book. Thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue, Finding thy worth a limit past my praise, And therefore art enforced to seek anew
Some fresher stamp of the time-bettering days. And do so, love, yet when they have devised What strain&egrave;d touches rhetoric can lend, Thou, truly fair, wert truly sympathized
In true plain words by thy true-telling friend; And their gross painting might be better used Where cheeks need blood; in thee it is abused.




I never saw that you did painting need, And therefore to your fair no painting set; I found, or thought I found, you did exceed That barren tender of a poet's debt;
And therefore have I slept in your report,
That you yourself being extant well might show How far a modern quill doth come too short, Speaking of worth, what worth in you doth grow. This silence for my sin you did impute,
Which shall be most my glory, being dumb, For I impair not beauty, being mute,
When others would give life and bring a tomb. There lives more life in one of your fair eyes, Than both your poets can in praise devise.




Who is it that says most, which can say more, Than this rich praise -- that you alone are you, In whose confine immur&egrave;d is the store Which should example where your equal grew? Lean penury within that pen doth dwell
That to his subject lends not some small glory; But he that writes of you, if he can tell
That you are you, so dignifies his story. Let him but copy what in you is writ,
Not making worse what nature made so clear, And such a counterpart shall fame his wit, Making his style admir&egrave;d everywhere.
You to your beauteous blessings add a curse,
Being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse.




Who is it that says most, which can say more, Than this rich praise, that you alone, are you, In whose confine immured is the store
Which should example where your equal grew? Lean penury within that pen doth dwell
That to his subject lends not some small glory; But he that writes of you, if he can tell
That you are you, so dignifies his story. Let him but copy what in you is writ,
Not making worse what nature made so clear, And such a counterpart shall fame his wit, Making his style admired every where.
You to your beauteous blessings add a curse,
Being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse. 


My tongue-tied Muse in manners holds her still, While comments of your praise, richly compiled, Reserve their character with golden quill,
And precious phrase by all the Muses filed.
I think good thoughts, whilst other write good words, And like unlettered clerk still cry "Amen"
To every hymn that able spirit affords
In polished form of well-refin&egrave;d pen. Hearing you praised, I say "'Tis so, 'tis true," And to the most of praise add something more; But that is in my thought, whose love to you,
Though words come hindmost, holds his rank before.
Then others for the breath of words respect, Me for my dumb thoughts, speaking in effect.




Was it the proud full sail of his great verse, Bound for the prize of all-too-precious you, That did my ripe thoughts in my brain inhearse,
Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew? Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write
Above a mortal pitch, that struck me dead? No, neither he, nor his compeers by night Giving him aid, my verse astonish&egrave;d. He nor that affable familiar ghost
Which nightly gulls him with intelligence, As victors of my silence cannot boast;
I was not sick of any fear from thence.
But when your countenance filled up his line, Then lacked I matter, that enfeebled mine.




Farewell! Thou art too dear for my possessing, And like enough thou know'st thy estimate, The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing; My bonds in thee are all determinate.
For how do I hold thee but by thy granting, And for that riches where is my deserving? The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting, And so my patent back again is swerving.
Thyself thou gav'st, thy own worth then not knowing, Or me, to whom thou gav'st it, else mistaking;
So thy great gift upon misprision growing,
Comes home again, on better judgement making.
Thus have I had thee as a dream doth flatter, In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.




When thou shalt be disposed to set me light And place my merit in the eye of scorn, Upon thy side, against myself I'll fight,
And prove thee virtuous, though thou art forsworn. With mine own weakness being best acquainted, Upon thy part I can set down a story
Of faults concealed, wherein I am attainted, That thou in losing me shalt win much glory. And I by this will be a gainer too;
For bending all my loving thoughts on thee, The injuries that to myself I do,
Doing thee vantage, double-vantage me.
Such is my love, to thee I so belong,
That for thy right, myself will bear all wrong.




Say that thou didst forsake me for some fault, And I will comment upon that offence;
Speak of my lameness, and I straight will halt, Against thy reasons making no defence.
Thou canst not, love, disgrace me half so ill, To set a form upon desir&egrave;d change, As I'll my self disgrace, knowing thy will,
I will acquaintance strangle and look strange, Be absent from thy walks and in my tongue
Thy sweet belov&egrave;d name no more shall dwell, Lest I, too much profane, should do it wrong
And haply of our old acquaintance tell.
For thee against myself I'll vow debate,
For I must ne'er love him whom thou dost hate.




Is it for fear to wet a widow's eye,
That thou consum'st thy self in single life? Ah, if thou issueless shalt hap to die,
The world will wail thee like a makeless wife. The world will be thy widow and still weep, That thou no form of thee hast left behind, When every private widow well may keep,
By children's eyes, her husband's shape in mind. Look what an unthrift in the world doth spend Shifts but his place, for still the world enjoys it; But beauty's waste hath in the world an end, And kept unused the user so destroys it.
No love toward others in that bosom sits
That on himself such murd'rous shame commits.


Now

Then hate me when thou wilt; if ever, now; Now, while the world is bent my deeds to cross, join with the spite of fortune, make me bow, And do not drop in for an after-loss.
Ah, do not, when my heart hath 'scaped this sorrow, Come in the rearward of a conquered woe;
Give not a windy night a rainy morrow, To linger out a purposed overthrow.
If thou wilt leave me, do not leave me last, When other petty griefs have done their spite, But in the onset come; so shall I taste
At first the very worst of fortune's might,
And other strains of woe, which now seem woe, Compared with loss of thee will not seem so.


Skill

Some glory in their birth, some in their skill, Some in their wealth, some in their body's force, Some in their garments though new-fangled ill,
Some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse; And every humour hath his adjunct pleasure,
Wherein it finds a joy above the rest,
But these particulars are not my measure; All these I better in one general best.
Thy love is better than high birth to me,
Richer than wealth, prouder than garments' costs, Of more delight than hawks and horses be;
And having thee, of all men's pride I boast&mdash; Wretched in this alone, that thou mayst take,
All this away and me most wretched make.




But do thy worst to steal thyself away, For term of life thou art assured mine; And life no longer than thy love will stay, For it depends upon that love of thine.
Then need I not to fear the worst of wrongs, When in the least of them my life hath end. I see a better state to me belongs
Than that which on thy humour doth depend: Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind, Since that my life on thy revolt doth lie.
O what a happy title do I find,
Happy to have thy love, happy to die!
But what's so blessed-fair that fears no blot? Thou mayst be false, and yet I know it not.




So shall I live, supposing thou art true, Like a deceived husband; so love's face
May still seem love to me, though altered new; Thy looks with me, thy heart in other place: For there can live no hatred in thine eye, Therefore in that I cannot know thy change.
In many's looks, the false heart's history
Is writ in moods, and frowns, and wrinkles strange. But heaven in thy creation did decree
That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell; Whate'er thy thoughts, or thy heart's workings be, Thy looks should nothing thence, but sweetness tell. How like Eve's apple doth thy beauty grow,
If thy sweet virtue answer not thy show! 


So shall I live, supposing thou art true,
Like a deceiv&egrave;d husband; so love's face May still seem love to me, though altered new, Thy looks with me, thy heart in other place.
For there can live no hatred in thine eye, Therefore in that I cannot know thy change. In many's looks, the false heart's history
Is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange, But heaven in thy creation did decree
That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell; Whate'er thy thoughts, or thy heart's workings be, Thy looks should nothing thence but sweetness tell.
How like Eve's apple doth thy beauty grow, If thy sweet virtue answer not thy show!


Do None

They that have power to hurt and will do none, That do not do the thing, they most do show, Who, moving others, are themselves as stone, Unmov&egrave;d, cold, and to temptation slow, They rightly do inherit heaven's graces,
And husband nature's riches from expense; They are the lords and owners of their faces, Others, but stewards of their excellence.
The summer's flower is to the summer sweet, Though to itself, it only live and die,
But if that flower with base infection meet, The basest weed outbraves his dignity.
For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds; Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds.


The Shame

How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame Which, like a canker in the fragrant rose,
Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name! O, in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose! That tongue that tells the story of thy days, Making lascivious comments on thy sport, Cannot dispraise, but in a kind of praise, Naming thy name, blesses an ill report.
O, what a mansion have those vices got Which for their habitation chose out thee, Where beauty's veil doth cover every blot, And all things turns to fair that eyes can see!
Take heed, dear heart, of this large privilege; The hardest knife ill-used doth lose his edge.


Wantonness

Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonness; Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport; Both grace and faults are loved of more and less; Thou mak'st faults graces that to thee resort.
As on the finger of a thron&egrave;d queen, The basest jewel will be well esteemed.
So are those errors that in thee are seen
To truths translated, and for true things deemed. How many lambs might the stern wolf betray,
If like a lamb he could his looks translate! How many gazers mightst thou lead away,
if thou wouldst use the strength of all thy state!
But do not so; I love thee in such sort
As thou being mine, mine is thy good report.




How like a winter hath my absence been From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year!
What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen! What old December's bareness everywhere!
And yet this time removed was summer's time, The teeming autumn, big with rich increase, Bearing the wanton burden of the prime,
Like widowed wombs after their lords' decease: Yet this abundant issue seemed to me
But hope of orphans, and unfathered fruit, For summer and his pleasures wait on thee, And thou away, the very birds are mute.
Or, if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer,
That leaves look pale, dreading the winter's near.


Spring

From you have I been absent in the spring, When proud-pied April, dressed in all his trim, Hath put a spirit of youth in every thing,
That heavy Saturn laughed and leaped with him. Yet nor the lays of birds, nor the sweet smell
Of different flowers in odour and in hue Could make me any summer's story tell,
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew. Nor did I wonder at the lily's white,
Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose; They were but sweet, but figures of delight Drawn after you, you pattern of all those.
Yet seemed it winter still, and you away, As with your shadow I with these did play.




The forward violet thus did I chide:
"Sweet thief, whence didst thou steal thy sweet that smells, If not from my love's breath? The purple pride
Which on thy soft check for complexion dwells In my love's veins thou hast too grossly dyed." The lily I condemn&egrave;d for thy hand,
And buds of marjoram had stol'n thy hair; The roses fearfully on thorns did stand,
One blushing shame, another white despair; A third, nor red, nor white, had stol'n of both, And to his robbery had annexed thy breath, But, for his theft, in pride of all his growth
A vengeful canker eat him up to death.
More flowers I noted, yet I none could see, But sweet or colour it had stol'n from thee.




 Where art thou, Muse, that thou forget'st so long To speak of that which gives thee all thy might?
Spend'st thou thy fury on some worthless song, Darkening thy power to lend base subjects light? Return, forgetful Muse, and straight redeem
In gentle numbers time so idly spent; Sing to the ear that doth thy lays esteem
And gives thy pen both skill and argument. Rise, resty Muse, my love's sweet face survey, If Time have any wrinkle graven there;
If any, be a satire to decay,
And make Time's spoils despised every where. Give my love fame faster than Time wastes life; So thou prevent'st his scythe and crooked knife.




 O truant Muse, what shall be thy amends For thy neglect of truth in beauty dyed?
Both truth and beauty on my love depends; So dost thou too, and therein dignified.
Make answer, Muse: wilt thou not haply say 'Truth needs no colour, with his colour fix'd; Beauty no pencil, beauty's truth to lay;
But best is best, if never intermix'd?'
Because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb? Excuse not silence so; for't lies in thee
To make him much outlive a gilded tomb, And to be praised of ages yet to be.
Then do thy office, Muse; I teach thee how
To make him seem long hence as he shows now.




 My love is strengthen'd, though more weak in seeming; I love not less, though less the show appear:
That love is merchandized whose rich esteeming The owner's tongue doth publish every where.
Our love was new and then but in the spring When I was wont to greet it with my lays, As Philomel in summer's front doth sing
And stops her pipe in growth of riper days: Not that the summer is less pleasant now
Than when her mournful hymns did hush the night, But that wild music burthens every bough
And sweets grown common lose their dear delight. Therefore like her I sometime hold my tongue, Because I would not dull you with my song.




 Alack, what poverty my Muse brings forth, That having such a scope to show her pride, The argument all bare is of more worth Than when it hath my added praise beside! O, blame me not, if I no more can write!
Look in your glass, and there appears a face That over-goes my blunt invention quite, Dulling my lines and doing me disgrace.
Were it not sinful then, striving to mend, To mar the subject that before was well? For to no other pass my verses tend Than of your graces and your gifts to tell;
And more, much more, than in my verse can sit Your own glass shows you when you look in it.




 To me, fair friend, you never can be old, For as you were when first your eye I eyed,
Such seems your beauty still. Three winters cold Have from the forests shook three summers' pride, Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turn'd In process of the seasons have I seen,
Three April perfumes in three hot Junes burn'd, Since first I saw you fresh, which yet are green. Ah! yet doth beauty, like a dial-hand,
Steal from his figure and no pace perceived;
So your sweet hue, which methinks still doth stand, Hath motion and mine eye may be deceived:
For fear of which, hear this, thou age unbred; Ere you were born was beauty's summer dead.




 O, never say that I was false of heart, Though absence seem'd my flame to qualify. As easy might I from myself depart
As from my soul, which in thy breast doth lie: That is my home of love: if I have ranged, Like him that travels I return again,
Just to the time, not with the time exchanged, So that myself bring water for my stain.
Never believe, though in my nature reign'd All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood, That it could so preposterously be stain'd, To leave for nothing all thy sum of good; For nothing this wide universe I call,
Save thou, my rose; in it thou art my all.




 O, from what power hast thou this powerful might With insufficiency my heart to sway?
To make me give the lie to my true sight,
And swear that brightness doth not grace the day? Whence hast thou this becoming of things ill,
That in the very refuse of thy deeds
There is such strength and warrantize of skill That, in my mind, thy worst all best exceeds? Who taught thee how to make me love thee more The more I hear and see just cause of hate?
O, though I love what others do abhor,
With others thou shouldst not abhor my state: If thy unworthiness raised love in me,
More worthy I to be beloved of thee.




 Love is too young to know what conscience is; Yet who knows not conscience is born of love? Then, gentle cheater, urge not my amiss,
Lest guilty of my faults thy sweet self prove: For, thou betraying me, I do betray
My nobler part to my gross body's treason; My soul doth tell my body that he may Triumph in love; flesh stays no father reason; But, rising at thy name, doth point out thee As his triumphant prize. Proud of this pride, He is contented thy poor drudge to be,
To stand in thy affairs, fall by thy side. No want of conscience hold it that I call
Her 'love' for whose dear love I rise and fall.




In loving thee thou know'st I am forsworn,
But thou art twice forsworn, to me love swearing, In act thy bed-vow broke and new faith torn,
In vowing new hate after new love bearing. But why of two oaths' breach do I accuse thee, When I break twenty? I am perjured most;
For all my vows are oaths but to misuse thee And all my honest faith in thee is lost,
For I have sworn deep oaths of thy deep kindness, Oaths of thy love, thy truth, thy constancy,
And, to enlighten thee, gave eyes to blindness, Or made them swear against the thing they see; For I have sworn thee fair; more perjured I,
To swear against the truth so foul a lie!




 Cupid laid by his brand, and fell asleep: A maid of Dian's this advantage found, And his love-kindling fire did quickly steep In a cold valley-fountain of that ground; Which borrow'd from this holy fire of Love A dateless lively heat, still to endure,
And grew a seething bath, which yet men prove Against strange maladies a sovereign cure.
But at my mistress' eye Love's brand new-fired, The boy for trial needs would touch my breast; I, sick withal, the help of bath desired,
And thither hied, a sad distemper'd guest, But found no cure: the bath for my help lies Where Cupid got new fire--my mistress' eyes.




The little Love-god lying once asleep
Laid by his side his heart-inflaming brand,
Whilst many nymphs that vow'd chaste life to keep Came tripping by; but in her maiden hand
The fairest votary took up that fire
Which many legions of true hearts had warm'd; And so the general of hot desire
Was sleeping by a virgin hand disarm'd. This brand she quenched in a cool well by, Which from Love's fire took heat perpetual, Growing a bath and healthful remedy
For men diseased; but I, my mistress' thrall, Came there for cure, and this by that I prove, Love's fire heats water, water cools not love.




 Let not my love be call'd idolatry, Nor my beloved as an idol show,
Since all alike my songs and praises be To one, of one, still such, and ever so. Kind is my love to-day, to-morrow kind, Still constant in a wondrous excellence;
Therefore my verse to constancy confined, One thing expressing, leaves out difference. 'Fair, kind and true' is all my argument, 'Fair, kind, and true' varying to other words; And in this change is my invention spent,
Three themes in one, which wondrous scope affords. 'Fair, kind, and true,' have often lived alone,
Which three till now never kept seat in one.




 When in the chronicle of wasted time I see descriptions of the fairest wights,
And beauty making beautiful old rhyme
In praise of ladies dead and lovely knights, Then, in the blazon of sweet beauty's best, Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow,
I see their antique pen would have express'd Even such a beauty as you master now.
So all their praises are but prophecies Of this our time, all you prefiguring;
And, for they look'd but with divining eyes, They had not skill enough your worth to sing: For we, which now behold these present days, Had eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise.




Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul
Of the wide world dreaming on things to come, Can yet the lease of my true love control, Supposed as forfeit to a confined doom.
The mortal moon hath her eclipse endured And the sad augurs mock their own presage; Incertainties now crown themselves assured And peace proclaims olives of endless age.
Now with the drops of this most balmy time
My love looks fresh, and death to me subscribes, Since, spite of him, I'll live in this poor rhyme, While he insults o'er dull and speechless tribes: And thou in this shalt find thy monument,
When tyrants' crests and tombs of brass are spent.


Soul

Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul
Of the wide world dreaming on things to come, Can yet the lease of my true love control, Suppos'd as forfeit to a confin'd doom.
The mortal moon hath her eclipse endur'd And the sad augurs mock their own presage; Incertainties now crown themselves assur'd And peace proclaims olives of endless age.
Now with the drops of this most balmy time
My love looks fresh, and Death to me subscribes, Since, spite of him, I'll live in this poor rhyme, While he insults o'er dull and speechless tribes; And thou in this shalt find thy monument,
When tyrants' crests and tombs of brass are spent. 


 What's in the brain that ink may character Which hath not figured to thee my true spirit? What's new to speak, what new to register, That may express my love or thy dear merit? Nothing, sweet boy; but yet, like prayers divine, I must, each day say o'er the very same, Counting no old thing old, thou mine, I thine, Even as when first I hallow'd thy fair name.
So that eternal love in love's fresh case Weighs not the dust and injury of age, Nor gives to necessary wrinkles place, But makes antiquity for aye his page, Finding the first conceit of love there bred
Where time and outward form would show it dead.




 Alas, 'tis true I have gone here and there And made myself a motley to the view,
Gored mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear, Made old offences of affections new;
Most true it is that I have look'd on truth Askance and strangely: but, by all above, These blenches gave my heart another youth, And worse essays proved thee my best of love. Now all is done, have what shall have no end: Mine appetite I never more will grind
On newer proof, to try an older friend, A god in love, to whom I am confined.
Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best, Even to thy pure and most most loving breast.




 O, for my sake do you with Fortune chide, The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds, That did not better for my life provide
Than public means which public manners breeds. Thence comes it that my name receives a brand, And almost thence my nature is subdued
To what it works in, like the dyer's hand: Pity me then and wish I were renew'd; Whilst, like a willing patient, I will drink Potions of eisel 'gainst my strong infection No bitterness that I will bitter think,
Nor double penance, to correct correction. Pity me then, dear friend, and I assure ye Even that your pity is enough to cure me.


Chide

O, for my sake do you with Fortune chide, The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds, That did not better for my life provide
Than public means which public manners breeds. Thence comes it that my name receives a brand, And almost thence my nature is subdu'd
To what it works in, like the dyer's hand. Pity me then and wish I were renew'd; Whilst, like a willing patient, I will drink Potions of eisel 'gainst my strong infection; No bitterness that I will bitter think,
Nor double penance, to correct correction. Pity me then, dear friend, and I assure ye Even that your pity is enough to cure me.




 Your love and pity doth the impression fill Which vulgar scandal stamp'd upon my brow; For what care I who calls me well or ill,
So you o'er-green my bad, my good allow? You are my all the world, and I must strive
To know my shames and praises from your tongue: None else to me, nor I to none alive,
That my steel'd sense or changes right or wrong. In so profound abysm I throw all care
Of others' voices, that my adder's sense To critic and to flatterer stopped are.
Mark how with my neglect I do dispense: You are so strongly in my purpose bred
That all the world besides methinks are dead.




 Since I left you, mine eye is in my mind; And that which governs me to go about Doth part his function and is partly blind, Seems seeing, but effectually is out;
For it no form delivers to the heart
Of bird of flower, or shape, which it doth latch: Of his quick objects hath the mind no part, Nor his own vision holds what it doth catch: For if it see the rudest or gentlest sight,
The most sweet favour or deformed'st creature, The mountain or the sea, the day or night,
The crow or dove, it shapes them to your feature: Incapable of more, replete with you,
My most true mind thus makes mine eye untrue.




 Or whether doth my mind, being crown'd with you, Drink up the monarch's plague, this flattery?
Or whether shall I say, mine eye saith true, And that your love taught it this alchemy, To make of monsters and things indigest Such cherubins as your sweet self resemble, Creating every bad a perfect best,
As fast as objects to his beams assemble? O,'tis the first; 'tis flattery in my seeing, And my great mind most kingly drinks it up:
Mine eye well knows what with his gust is 'greeing, And to his palate doth prepare the cup:
If it be poison'd, 'tis the lesser sin
That mine eye loves it and doth first begin.




 What potions have I drunk of Siren tears, Distill'd from limbecks foul as hell within, Applying fears to hopes and hopes to fears, Still losing when I saw myself to win!
What wretched errors hath my heart committed, Whilst it hath thought itself so blessed never!
How have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted In the distraction of this madding fever!
O benefit of ill! now I find true
That better is by evil still made better; And ruin'd love, when it is built anew,
Grows fairer than at first, more strong, far greater. So I return rebuked to my content
And gain by ill thrice more than I have spent.




Be wise as thou art cruel; do not press
My tongue-tied patience with too much disdain; Lest sorrow lend me words and words express The manner of my pity-wanting pain.
If I might teach thee wit, better it were, Though not to love, yet, love, to tell me so; As testy sick men, when their deaths be near,
No news but health from their physicians know; For if I should despair, I should grow mad,
And in my madness might speak ill of thee: Now this ill-wresting world is grown so bad, Mad slanderers by mad ears believed be, That I may not be so, nor thou belied,
Bear thine eyes straight, though thy proud heart go wide.




 In faith, I do not love thee with mine eyes, For they in thee a thousand errors note;
But 'tis my heart that loves what they despise, Who in despite of view is pleased to dote;




 Love is my sin and thy dear virtue hate, Hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving:
O, but with mine compare thou thine own state, And thou shalt find it merits not reproving;
Or, if it do, not from those lips of thine, That have profaned their scarlet ornaments
And seal'd false bonds of love as oft as mine, Robb'd others' beds' revenues of their rents. Be it lawful I love thee, as thou lovest those Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee: Root pity in thy heart, that when it grows
Thy pity may deserve to pitied be.
If thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide, By self-example mayst thou be denied!




 Lo! as a careful housewife runs to catch One of her feather'd creatures broke away,
Sets down her babe and makes an swift dispatch In pursuit of the thing she would have stay, Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase, Cries to catch her whose busy care is bent
To follow that which flies before her face, Not prizing her poor infant's discontent;
So runn'st thou after that which flies from thee, Whilst I thy babe chase thee afar behind;
But if thou catch thy hope, turn back to me, And play the mother's part, kiss me, be kind: So will I pray that thou mayst have thy 'Will,' If thou turn back, and my loud crying still.




 Two loves I have of comfort and despair, Which like two spirits do suggest me still: The better angel is a man right fair,
The worser spirit a woman colour'd ill. To win me soon to hell, my female evil Tempteth my better angel from my side,
And would corrupt my saint to be a devil, Wooing his purity with her foul pride.
And whether that my angel be turn'd fiend Suspect I may, but not directly tell;
But being both from me, both to each friend, I guess one angel in another's hell:
Yet this shall I ne'er know, but live in doubt, Till my bad angel fire my good one out.




 Canst thou, O cruel! say I love thee not, When I against myself with thee partake? Do I not think on thee, when I forgot
Am of myself, all tyrant, for thy sake? Who hateth thee that I do call my friend?
On whom frown'st thou that I do fawn upon? Nay, if thou lour'st on me, do I not spend Revenge upon myself with present moan?
What merit do I in myself respect, That is so proud thy service to despise,
When all my best doth worship thy defect, Commanded by the motion of thine eyes? But, love, hate on, for now I know thy mind;
Those that can see thou lovest, and I am blind.




 Those lips that Love's own hand did make Breathed forth the sound that said 'I hate' To me that languish'd for her sake;
But when she saw my woeful state, Straight in her heart did mercy come, Chiding that tongue that ever sweet Was used in giving gentle doom,
And taught it thus anew to greet: 'I hate' she alter'd with an end, That follow'd it as gentle day Doth follow night, who like a fiend
From heaven to hell is flown away; 'I hate' from hate away she threw, And saved my life, saying 'not you.'




Poor soul, the centre of my sinful earth,
[ ] these rebel powers that thee array;
Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth, Painting thy outward walls so costly gay?
Why so large cost, having so short a lease, Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend? Shall worms, inheritors of this excess,
Eat up thy charge? is this thy body's end? Then soul, live thou upon thy servant's loss, And let that pine to aggravate thy store; Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross; Within be fed, without be rich no more:
So shalt thou feed on Death, that feeds on men, And Death once dead, there's no more dying then.




My love is as a fever, longing still
For that which longer nurseth the disease, Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill, The uncertain sickly appetite to please.
My reason, the physician to my love, Angry that his prescriptions are not kept, Hath left me, and I desperate now approve Desire is death, which physic did except.
Past cure I am, now reason is past care, And frantic-mad with evermore unrest;
My thoughts and my discourse as madmen's are, At random from the truth vainly express'd;
For I have sworn thee fair and thought thee bright, Who art as black as hell, as dark as night.




 O me, what eyes hath Love put in my head, Which have no correspondence with true sight! Or, if they have, where is my judgment fled, That censures falsely what they see aright?
If that be fair whereon my false eyes dote, What means the world to say it is not so? If it be not, then love doth well denote Love's eye is not so true as all men's 'No.' How can it? O, how can Love's eye be true,
That is so vex'd with watching and with tears? No marvel then, though I mistake my view; The sun itself sees not till heaven clears.
O cunning Love! with tears thou keep'st me blind, Lest eyes well-seeing thy foul faults should find.




Those lines that I before have writ do lie,
Even those that said I could not love you dearer: Yet then my judgment knew no reason why
My most full flame should afterwards burn clearer. But reckoning time, whose million'd accidents Creep in 'twixt vows and change decrees of kings, Tan sacred beauty, blunt the sharp'st intents, Divert strong minds to the course of altering things; Alas, why, fearing of time's tyranny,
Might I not then say 'Now I love you best,' When I was certain o'er incertainty, Crowning the present, doubting of the rest? Love is a babe; then might I not say so,
To give full growth to that which still doth grow?




 Let me not to the marriage of true minds Admit impediments. Love is not love Which alters when it alteration finds,
Or bends with the remover to remove: O no! it is an ever-fixed mark
That looks on tempests and is never shaken; It is the star to every wandering bark,
Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken. Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks Within his bending sickle's compass come:
Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks, But bears it out even to the edge of doom.
If this be error and upon me proved, I never writ, nor no man ever loved.


Minds

Let me not to the marriage of true minds Admit impediments. Love is not love Which alters when it alteration finds,
Or bends with the remover to remove: O no! it is an ever-fixed mark
That looks on tempests and is never shaken; It is the star to every wandering bark,
Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken. Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks Within his bending sickle's compass come:
Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks, But bears it out even to the edge of doom.
If this be error and upon me proved, I never writ, nor no man ever loved.




 Accuse me thus: that I have scanted all Wherein I should your great deserts repay, Forgot upon your dearest love to call, Whereto all bonds do tie me day by day;
That I have frequent been with unknown minds And given to time your own dear-purchased right That I have hoisted sail to all the winds
Which should transport me farthest from your sight. Book both my wilfulness and errors down
And on just proof surmise accumulate; Bring me within the level of your frown, But shoot not at me in your waken'd hate; Since my appeal says I did strive to prove The constancy and virtue of your love.




 Like as, to make our appetites more keen, With eager compounds we our palate urge, As, to prevent our maladies unseen,
We sicken to shun sickness when we purge,
Even so, being tuff of your ne'er-cloying sweetness, To bitter sauces did I frame my feeding
And, sick of welfare, found a kind of meetness To be diseased ere that there was true needing. Thus policy in love, to anticipate
The ills that were not, grew to faults assured And brought to medicine a healthful state Which, rank of goodness, would by ill be cured: But thence I learn, and find the lesson true, Drugs poison him that so fell sick of you.




 That you were once unkind befriends me now, And for that sorrow which I then did feel Needs must I under my transgression bow,
Unless my nerves were brass or hammer'd steel. For if you were by my unkindness shaken
As I by yours, you've pass'd a hell of time, And I, a tyrant, have no leisure taken
To weigh how once I suffered in your crime.
O, that our night of woe might have remember'd My deepest sense, how hard true sorrow hits, And soon to you, as you to me, then tender'd The humble slave which wounded bosoms fits!
But that your trespass now becomes a fee;
Mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransom me.




 'Tis better to be vile than vile esteem'd, When not to be receives reproach of being, And the just pleasure lost which is so deem'd Not by our feeling but by others' seeing:
For why should others false adulterate eyes Give salutation to my sportive blood?
Or on my frailties why are frailer spies,
Which in their wills count bad what I think good? No, I am that I am, and they that level
At my abuses reckon up their own:
I may be straight, though they themselves be bevel; By their rank thoughts my deeds must not be shown; Unless this general evil they maintain,
All men are bad, and in their badness reign.




 Thy gift, thy tables, are within my brain Full character'd with lasting memory, Which shall above that idle rank remain Beyond all date, even to eternity;
Or at the least, so long as brain and heart Have faculty by nature to subsist;
Till each to razed oblivion yield his part Of thee, thy record never can be miss'd.
That poor retention could not so much hold, Nor need I tallies thy dear love to score; Therefore to give them from me was I bold, To trust those tables that receive thee more: To keep an adjunct to remember thee
Were to import forgetfulness in me.




 No, Time, thou shalt not boast that I do change: Thy pyramids built up with newer might
To me are nothing novel, nothing strange; They are but dressings of a former sight. Our dates are brief, and therefore we admire What thou dost foist upon us that is old,
And rather make them born to our desire
Than think that we before have heard them told. Thy registers and thee I both defy,
Not wondering at the present nor the past, For thy records and what we see doth lie, Made more or less by thy continual haste. This I do vow and this shall ever be;
I will be true, despite thy scythe and thee.




 The expense of spirit in a waste of shame Is lust in action; and till action, lust
Is perjured, murderous, bloody, full of blame, Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust, Enjoy'd no sooner but despised straight,
Past reason hunted, and no sooner had Past reason hated, as a swallow'd bait On purpose laid to make the taker mad; Mad in pursuit and in possession so;
Had, having, and in quest to have, extreme; A bliss in proof, and proved, a very woe; Before, a joy proposed; behind, a dream.
All this the world well knows; yet none knows well To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell.




 Were 't aught to me I bore the canopy, With my extern the outward honouring, Or laid great bases for eternity,
Which prove more short than waste or ruining? Have I not seen dwellers on form and favour Lose all, and more, by paying too much rent, For compound sweet forgoing simple savour, Pitiful thrivers, in their gazing spent?
No, let me be obsequious in thy heart, And take thou my oblation, poor but free,
Which is not mix'd with seconds, knows no art, But mutual render, only me for thee.
Hence, thou suborn'd informer! a true soul
When most impeach'd stands least in thy control.




 O thou, my lovely boy, who in thy power Dost hold Time's fickle glass, his sickle, hour;
Who hast by waning grown, and therein show'st Thy lovers withering as thy sweet self grow'st; If Nature, sovereign mistress over wrack,
As thou goest onwards, still will pluck thee back, She keeps thee to this purpose, that her skill May time disgrace and wretched minutes kill.
Yet fear her, O thou minion of her pleasure!
She may detain, but not still keep, her treasure: Her audit, though delay'd, answer'd must be, And her quietus is to render thee.




 How oft, when thou, my music, music play'st, Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds With thy sweet fingers, when thou gently sway'st The wiry concord that mine ear confounds,
Do I envy those jacks that nimble leap To kiss the tender inward of thy hand,
Whilst my poor lips, which should that harvest reap, At the wood's boldness by thee blushing stand!
To be so tickled, they would change their state And situation with those dancing chips,
O'er whom thy fingers walk with gentle gait, Making dead wood more blest than living lips. Since saucy jacks so happy are in this,
Give them thy fingers, me thy lips to kiss.




Thou art as tyrannous, so as thou art,
As those whose beauties proudly make them cruel; For well thou know'st to my dear doting heart Thou art the fairest and most precious jewel.
Yet, in good faith, some say that thee behold Thy face hath not the power to make love groan: To say they err I dare not be so bold,
Although I swear it to myself alone. And, to be sure that is not false I swear,
A thousand groans, but thinking on thy face, One on another's neck, do witness bear
Thy black is fairest in my judgment's place. In nothing art thou black save in thy deeds, And thence this slander, as I think, proceeds.




 Thine eyes I love, and they, as pitying me, Knowing thy heart torments me with disdain, Have put on black and loving mourners be, Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain.
And truly not the morning sun of heaven Better becomes the grey cheeks of the east, Nor that full star that ushers in the even Doth half that glory to the sober west,
As those two mourning eyes become thy face: O, let it then as well beseem thy heart
To mourn for me, since mourning doth thee grace, And suit thy pity like in every part.
Then will I swear beauty herself is black And all they foul that thy complexion lack.




 Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan For that deep wound it gives my friend and me!
Is't not enough to torture me alone,
But slave to slavery my sweet'st friend must be? Me from myself thy cruel eye hath taken,
And my next self thou harder hast engross'd: Of him, myself, and thee, I am forsaken;
A torment thrice threefold thus to be cross'd. Prison my heart in thy steel bosom's ward,
But then my friend's heart let my poor heart bail; Whoe'er keeps me, let my heart be his guard; Thou canst not then use rigor in my gaol:
And yet thou wilt; for I, being pent in thee, Perforce am thine, and all that is in me.




 So, now I have confess'd that he is thine, And I myself am mortgaged to thy will, Myself I'll forfeit, so that other mine
Thou wilt restore, to be my comfort still: But thou wilt not, nor he will not be free, For thou art covetous and he is kind;
He learn'd but surety-like to write for me Under that bond that him as fast doth bind. The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take, Thou usurer, that put'st forth all to use, And sue a friend came debtor for my sake; So him I lose through my unkind abuse.
Him have I lost; thou hast both him and me: He pays the whole, and yet am I not free.




O, call not me to justify the wrong
That thy unkindness lays upon my heart;
Wound me not with thine eye but with thy tongue; Use power with power and slay me not by art.
Tell me thou lovest elsewhere, but in my sight, Dear heart, forbear to glance thine eye aside:
What need'st thou wound with cunning when thy might Is more than my o'er-press'd defense can bide?
Let me excuse thee: ah! my love well knows Her pretty looks have been mine enemies,
And therefore from my face she turns my foes, That they elsewhere might dart their injuries: Yet do not so; but since I am near slain,
Kill me outright with looks and rid my pain.




 Whoever hath her wish, thou hast thy 'Will,' And 'Will' to boot, and 'Will' in overplus; More than enough am I that vex thee still, To thy sweet will making addition thus.
Wilt thou, whose will is large and spacious, Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine? Shall will in others seem right gracious,
And in my will no fair acceptance shine? The sea all water, yet receives rain still And in abundance addeth to his store;
So thou, being rich in 'Will,' add to thy 'Will' One will of mine, to make thy large 'Will' more. Let no unkind, no fair beseechers kill;
   Think all but one, and me in that one 'Will.' 


 If thy soul cheque thee that I come so near, Swear to thy blind soul that I was thy 'Will,' And will, thy soul knows, is admitted there; Thus far for love my love-suit, sweet, fulfil. 'Will' will fulfil the treasure of thy love,
Ay, fill it full with wills, and my will one.
In things of great receipt with ease we prove Among a number one is reckon'd none: Then in the number let me pass untold,
Though in thy stores' account I one must be; For nothing hold me, so it please thee hold That nothing me, a something sweet to thee: Make but my name thy love, and love that still, And then thou lovest me, for my name is 'Will.'




 Thou blind fool, Love, what dost thou to mine eyes, That they behold, and see not what they see?
They know what beauty is, see where it lies, Yet what the best is take the worst to be.
If eyes corrupt by over-partial looks
Be anchor'd in the bay where all men ride, Why of eyes' falsehood hast thou forged hooks, Whereto the judgment of my heart is tied?
Why should my heart think that a several plot
Which my heart knows the wide world's common place? Or mine eyes seeing this, say this is not,
To put fair truth upon so foul a face?
In things right true my heart and eyes have erred, And to this false plague are they now transferr'd.




 When my love swears that she is made of truth I do believe her, though I know she lies,
That she might think me some untutor'd youth, Unlearned in the world's false subtleties.
Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young, Although she knows my days are past the best, Simply I credit her false speaking tongue:
On both sides thus is simple truth suppress'd. But wherefore says she not she is unjust?
And wherefore say not I that I am old? O, love's best habit is in seeming trust,
And age in love loves not to have years told: Therefore I lie with her and she with me, And in our faults by lies we flatter'd be.




From fairest creatures we desire increase, That thereby beauty's rose might never die, But as the riper should by time decease, His tender heir might bear his memory:
But thou, contracted to thine own bright eyes, Feed'st thy light'st flame with self-substantial fuel, Making a famine where abundance lies,
Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel. Thou that art now the world's fresh ornament And only herald to the gaudy spring,
Within thine own bud buriest thy content
And, tender churl, makest waste in niggarding. Pity the world, or else this glutton be,
To eat the world's due, by the grave and thee. 


When forty winters shall besiege thy brow, And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field, Thy youth's proud livery, so gazed on now, Will be a tatter'd weed, of small worth held: Then being ask'd where all thy beauty lies, Where all the treasure of thy lusty days,
To say, within thine own deep-sunken eyes, Were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise.
How much more praise deserved thy beauty's use, If thou couldst answer 'This fair child of mine
Shall sum my count and make my old excuse,' Proving his beauty by succession thine!
This were to be new made when thou art old, And see thy blood warm when thou feel'st it cold.


Viewest

Look in thy glass, and tell the face thou viewest Now is the time that face should form another; Whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest,
Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother. For where is she so fair whose unear'd womb Disdains the tillage of thy husbandry?
Or who is he so fond will be the tomb Of his self-love, to stop posterity?
Thou art thy mother's glass, and she in thee Calls back the lovely April of her prime:
So thou through windows of thine age shall see Despite of wrinkles this thy golden time.
But if thou live, remember'd not to be,
Die single, and thine image dies with thee. 
Spend

Unthrifty loveliness, why dost thou spend Upon thy self thy beauty's legacy?
Nature's bequest gives nothing, but doth lend, And being frank she lends to those are free: Then, beauteous niggard, why dost thou abuse The bounteous largess given thee to give?
Profitless usurer, why dost thou use
So great a sum of sums, yet canst not live? For having traffic with thy self alone,
Thou of thy self thy sweet self dost deceive: Then how when nature calls thee to be gone, What acceptable audit canst thou leave?
Thy unused beauty must be tombed with thee, Which, used, lives th' executor to be.




Is it for fear to wet a widow's eye
That thou consumest thyself in single life? Ah! if thou issueless shalt hap to die.
The world will wail thee, like a makeless wife; The world will be thy widow and still weep That thou no form of thee hast left behind, When every private widow well may keep
By children's eyes her husband's shape in mind. Look, what an unthrift in the world doth spend Shifts but his place, for still the world enjoys it; But beauty's waste hath in the world an end, And kept unused, the user so destroys it.
No love toward others in that bosom sits
That on himself such murderous shame commits.




 How heavy do I journey on the way, When what I seek, my weary travel's end,
Doth teach that ease and that repose to say 'Thus far the miles are measured from thy friend!' The beast that bears me, tired with my woe, Plods dully on, to bear that weight in me,
As if by some instinct the wretch did know
His rider loved not speed, being made from thee: The bloody spur cannot provoke him on
That sometimes anger thrusts into his hide; Which heavily he answers with a groan, More sharp to me than spurring to his side;
For that same groan doth put this in my mind; My grief lies onward and my joy behind.




 Thus can my love excuse the slow offence Of my dull bearer when from thee I speed:
From where thou art why should I haste me thence? Till I return, of posting is no need.
O, what excuse will my poor beast then find, When swift extremity can seem but slow?
Then should I spur, though mounted on the wind; In winged speed no motion shall I know:
Then can no horse with my desire keep pace; Therefore desire of perfect'st love being made, Shall neigh--no dull flesh--in his fiery race; But love, for love, thus shall excuse my jade; Since from thee going he went wilful-slow,
Towards thee I'll run, and give him leave to go.




So am I as the rich, whose blessed key
Can bring him to his sweet up-locked treasure, The which he will not every hour survey,
For blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure. Therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare, Since, seldom coming, in the long year set, Like stones of worth they thinly placed are, Or captain jewels in the carcanet.
So is the time that keeps you as my chest, Or as the wardrobe which the robe doth hide, To make some special instant special blest, By new unfolding his imprison'd pride.
Blessed are you, whose worthiness gives scope, Being had, to triumph, being lack'd, to hope.




 What is your substance, whereof are you made, That millions of strange shadows on you tend?
Since every one hath, every one, one shade, And you, but one, can every shadow lend.
Describe Adonis, and the counterfeit Is poorly imitated after you;
On Helen's cheek all art of beauty set, And you in Grecian tires are painted new:
Speak of the spring and foison of the year; The one doth shadow of your beauty show, The other as your bounty doth appear; And you in every blessed shape we know. In all external grace you have some part,
But you like none, none you, for constant heart.




If there be nothing new, but that which is
Hath been before, how are our brains beguiled, Which, labouring for invention, bear amiss
The second burden of a former child!
O, that record could with a backward look, Even of five hundred courses of the sun, Show me your image in some antique book, Since mind at first in character was done!
That I might see what the old world could say To this composed wonder of your frame;
Whether we are mended, or whether better they, Or whether revolution be the same.
O, sure I am, the wits of former days
 To subjects worse have given admiring praise. 


Not marble, nor the gilded monuments
Of princes, shall outlive this powerful rhyme;
But you shall shine more bright in these contents Than unswept stone besmear'd with sluttish time. When wasteful war shall statues overturn,
And broils root out the work of masonry,
Nor Mars his sword nor war's quick fire shall burn The living record of your memory.
'Gainst death and all-oblivious enmity
Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room Even in the eyes of all posterity
That wear this world out to the ending doom. So, till the judgment that yourself arise,
You live in this, and dwell in lover's eyes.




 Sweet love, renew thy force; be it not said Thy edge should blunter be than appetite, Which but to-day by feeding is allay'd,
To-morrow sharpen'd in his former might: So, love, be thou; although to-day thou fill
Thy hungry eyes even till they wink with fullness, To-morrow see again, and do not kill
The spirit of love with a perpetual dullness. Let this sad interim like the ocean be
Which parts the shore, where two contracted new Come daily to the banks, that, when they see Return of love, more blest may be the view;
Else call it winter, which being full of care
Makes summer's welcome thrice more wish'd, more rare.




 Being your slave, what should I do but tend Upon the hours and times of your desire?
I have no precious time at all to spend, Nor services to do, till you require.
Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for you, Nor think the bitterness of absence sour
When you have bid your servant once adieu; Nor dare I question with my jealous thought Where you may be, or your affairs suppose, But, like a sad slave, stay and think of nought
Save, where you are how happy you make those. So true a fool is love that in your will,
Though you do any thing, he thinks no ill.




That god forbid that made me first your slave,
I should in thought control your times of pleasure, Or at your hand the account of hours to crave, Being your vassal, bound to stay your leisure!
O, let me suffer, being at your beck, The imprison'd absence of your liberty;
And patience, tame to sufferance, bide each cheque, Without accusing you of injury.
Be where you list, your charter is so strong That you yourself may privilege your time To what you will; to you it doth belong Yourself to pardon of self-doing crime.
I am to wait, though waiting so be hell; Not blame your pleasure, be it ill or well.




 Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore, So do our minutes hasten to their end;
Each changing place with that which goes before, In sequent toil all forwards do contend.
Nativity, once in the main of light,
Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crown'd, Crooked elipses 'gainst his glory fight,
And Time that gave doth now his gift confound. Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth And delves the parallels in beauty's brow, Feeds on the rarities of nature's truth,
And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow: And yet to times in hope my verse shall stand, Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand.




 Is it thy will thy image should keep open My heavy eyelids to the weary night?
Dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken, While shadows like to thee do mock my sight?
Is it thy spirit that thou send'st from thee So far from home into my deeds to pry, To find out shames and idle hours in me, The scope and tenor of thy jealousy?
O, no! thy love, though much, is not so great: It is my love that keeps mine eye awake; Mine own true love that doth my rest defeat, To play the watchman ever for thy sake:
For thee watch I whilst thou dost wake elsewhere, From me far off, with others all too near.




 Sin of self-love possesseth all mine eye And all my soul and all my every part; And for this sin there is no remedy,
It is so grounded inward in my heart. Methinks no face so gracious is as mine, No shape so true, no truth of such account; And for myself mine own worth do define, As I all other in all worths surmount.
But when my glass shows me myself indeed, Beated and chopp'd with tann'd antiquity, Mine own self-love quite contrary I read; Self so self-loving were iniquity.
'Tis thee, myself, that for myself I praise, Painting my age with beauty of thy days.




Against my love shall be, as I am now,
With Time's injurious hand crush'd and o'er-worn; When hours have drain'd his blood and fill'd his brow With lines and wrinkles; when his youthful morn Hath travell'd on to age's steepy night,
And all those beauties whereof now he's king Are vanishing or vanish'd out of sight, Stealing away the treasure of his spring;
For such a time do I now fortify Against confounding age's cruel knife, That he shall never cut from memory
My sweet love's beauty, though my lover's life: His beauty shall in these black lines be seen, And they shall live, and he in them still green.




 Those parts of thee that the world's eye doth view Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend; All tongues, the voice of souls, give thee that due, Uttering bare truth, even so as foes commend.
Thy outward thus with outward praise is crown'd; But those same tongues that give thee so thine own In other accents do this praise confound
By seeing farther than the eye hath shown. They look into the beauty of thy mind,
And that, in guess, they measure by thy deeds;
Then, churls, their thoughts, although their eyes were kind, To thy fair flower add the rank smell of weeds:
But why thy odour matcheth not thy show, The solve is this, that thou dost common grow.




 Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea, But sad mortality o'er-sways their power,
How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea, Whose action is no stronger than a flower? O, how shall summer's honey breath hold out Against the wreckful siege of battering days, When rocks impregnable are not so stout,
Nor gates of steel so strong, but Time decays? O fearful meditation! where, alack,
Shall Time's best jewel from Time's chest lie hid? Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back? Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?
O, none, unless this miracle have might,
That in black ink my love may still shine bright.




 Tired with all these, for restful death I cry, As, to behold desert a beggar born,
And needy nothing trimm'd in jollity, And purest faith unhappily forsworn,
And guilded honour shamefully misplaced, And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted, And right perfection wrongfully disgraced, And strength by limping sway disabled, And art made tongue-tied by authority, And folly doctor-like controlling skill,
And simple truth miscall'd simplicity, And captive good attending captain ill:
Tired with all these, from these would I be gone, Save that, to die, I leave my love alone.




That thou art blamed shall not be thy defect, For slander's mark was ever yet the fair; The ornament of beauty is suspect,
A crow that flies in heaven's sweetest air. So thou be good, slander doth but approve Thy worth the greater, being woo'd of time; For canker vice the sweetest buds doth love, And thou present'st a pure unstained prime.
Thou hast pass'd by the ambush of young days, Either not assail'd or victor being charged;
Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise, To tie up envy evermore enlarged:
If some suspect of ill mask'd not thy show,
Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe.




No longer mourn for me when I am dead Then you shall hear the surly sullen bell Give warning to the world that I am fled
From this vile world, with vilest worms to dwell: Nay, if you read this line, remember not
The hand that writ it; for I love you so
That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot If thinking on me then should make you woe. O, if, I say, you look upon this verse
When I perhaps compounded am with clay, Do not so much as my poor name rehearse. But let your love even with my life decay,
Lest the wise world should look into your moan And mock you with me after I am gone.




O, lest the world should task you to recite What merit lived in me, that you should love After my death, dear love, forget me quite, For you in me can nothing worthy prove; Unless you would devise some virtuous lie, To do more for me than mine own desert, And hang more praise upon deceased I Than niggard truth would willingly impart:
O, lest your true love may seem false in this, That you for love speak well of me untrue, My name be buried where my body is,
And live no more to shame nor me nor you. For I am shamed by that which I bring forth,
And so should you, to love things nothing worth.




That time of year thou mayst in me behold When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang
Upon those boughs which shake against the cold, Bare ruin'd choirs, where late the sweet birds sang. In me thou seest the twilight of such day
As after sunset fadeth in the west,
Which by and by black night doth take away, Death's second self, that seals up all in rest. In me thou see'st the glowing of such fire That on the ashes of his youth doth lie,
As the death-bed whereon it must expire Consumed with that which it was nourish'd by.
This thou perceivest, which makes thy love more strong, To love that well which thou must leave ere long.




But be contented: when that fell arrest Without all bail shall carry me away, My life hath in this line some interest,
Which for memorial still with thee shall stay. When thou reviewest this, thou dost review The very part was consecrate to thee:
The earth can have but earth, which is his due; My spirit is thine, the better part of me:
So then thou hast but lost the dregs of life, The prey of worms, my body being dead, The coward conquest of a wretch's knife, Too base of thee to be remembered.
The worth of that is that which it contains, And that is this, and this with thee remains.




Whilst I alone did call upon thy aid,
My verse alone had all thy gentle grace, But now my gracious numbers are decay'd And my sick Muse doth give another place. I grant, sweet love, thy lovely argument Deserves the travail of a worthier pen,
Yet what of thee thy poet doth invent He robs thee of and pays it thee again.
He lends thee virtue and he stole that word From thy behavior; beauty doth he give And found it in thy cheek; he can afford
No praise to thee but what in thee doth live. Then thank him not for that which he doth say, Since what he owes thee thou thyself dost pay.




So are you to my thoughts as food to life,
Or as sweet-season'd showers are to the ground; And for the peace of you I hold such strife
As 'twixt a miser and his wealth is found; Now proud as an enjoyer and anon
Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure, Now counting best to be with you alone,
Then better'd that the world may see my pleasure; Sometime all full with feasting on your sight
And by and by clean starved for a look; Possessing or pursuing no delight,
Save what is had or must from you be took. Thus do I pine and surfeit day by day,
Or gluttoning on all, or all away.




Why is my verse so barren of new pride, So far from variation or quick change? Why with the time do I not glance aside
To new-found methods and to compounds strange? Why write I still all one, ever the same,
And keep invention in a noted weed,
That every word doth almost tell my name, Showing their birth and where they did proceed? O, know, sweet love, I always write of you,
And you and love are still my argument; So all my best is dressing old words new, Spending again what is already spent: For as the sun is daily new and old,
So is my love still telling what is told.




Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear, Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste;
The vacant leaves thy mind's imprint will bear, And of this book this learning mayst thou taste. The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show
Of mouthed graves will give thee memory; Thou by thy dial's shady stealth mayst know Time's thievish progress to eternity.
Look, what thy memory can not contain
Commit to these waste blanks, and thou shalt find Those children nursed, deliver'd from thy brain, To take a new acquaintance of thy mind.
These offices, so oft as thou wilt look,
Shall profit thee and much enrich thy book.




 So oft have I invoked thee for my Muse And found such fair assistance in my verse As every alien pen hath got my use
And under thee their poesy disperse.
Thine eyes that taught the dumb on high to sing And heavy ignorance aloft to fly
Have added feathers to the learned's wing And given grace a double majesty.
Yet be most proud of that which I compile, Whose influence is thine and born of thee:
In others' works thou dost but mend the style, And arts with thy sweet graces graced be;
But thou art all my art and dost advance As high as learning my rude ignorance.




 O, how I faint when I of you do write, Knowing a better spirit doth use your name, And in the praise thereof spends all his might,
To make me tongue-tied, speaking of your fame! But since your worth, wide as the ocean is,
The humble as the proudest sail doth bear, My saucy bark inferior far to his
On your broad main doth wilfully appear. Your shallowest help will hold me up afloat,
Whilst he upon your soundless deep doth ride; Or being wreck'd, I am a worthless boat,
He of tall building and of goodly pride: Then if he thrive and I be cast away,
The worst was this; my love was my decay.




Or I shall live your epitaph to make,
Or you survive when I in earth am rotten; From hence your memory death cannot take, Although in me each part will be forgotten.
Your name from hence immortal life shall have, Though I, once gone, to all the world must die: The earth can yield me but a common grave, When you entombed in men's eyes shall lie.
Your monument shall be my gentle verse, Which eyes not yet created shall o'er-read, And tongues to be your being shall rehearse When all the breathers of this world are dead; You still shall live--such virtue hath my pen--
Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men.




 I grant thou wert not married to my Muse And therefore mayst without attaint o'erlook The dedicated words which writers use
Of their fair subject, blessing every book Thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue, Finding thy worth a limit past my praise, And therefore art enforced to seek anew
Some fresher stamp of the time-bettering days And do so, love; yet when they have devised What strained touches rhetoric can lend,
Thou truly fair wert truly sympathized
In true plain words by thy true-telling friend; And their gross painting might be better used Where cheeks need blood; in thee it is abused.




 I never saw that you did painting need And therefore to your fair no painting set; I found, or thought I found, you did exceed The barren tender of a poet's debt;
And therefore have I slept in your report,
That you yourself being extant well might show How far a modern quill doth come too short, Speaking of worth, what worth in you doth grow. This silence for my sin you did impute,
Which shall be most my glory, being dumb; For I impair not beauty being mute,
When others would give life and bring a tomb. There lives more life in one of your fair eyes Than both your poets can in praise devise.




 Who is it that says most? which can say more Than this rich praise, that you alone are you? In whose confine immured is the store
Which should example where your equal grew. Lean penury within that pen doth dwell
That to his subject lends not some small glory; But he that writes of you, if he can tell
That you are you, so dignifies his story, Let him but copy what in you is writ,
Not making worse what nature made so clear, And such a counterpart shall fame his wit, Making his style admired every where.
You to your beauteous blessings add a curse,
Being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse.




 Say that thou didst forsake me for some fault, And I will comment upon that offence;
Speak of my lameness, and I straight will halt, Against thy reasons making no defence.
Thou canst not, love, disgrace me half so ill, To set a form upon desired change,
As I'll myself disgrace: knowing thy will,
I will acquaintance strangle and look strange, Be absent from thy walks, and in my tongue Thy sweet beloved name no more shall dwell, Lest I, too much profane, should do it wrong And haply of our old acquaintance tell.
For thee against myself I'll vow debate,
For I must ne'er love him whom thou dost hate.




 My tongue-tied Muse in manners holds her still, While comments of your praise, richly compiled, Reserve their character with golden quill
And precious phrase by all the Muses filed.
I think good thoughts whilst other write good words, And like unletter'd clerk still cry 'Amen'
To every hymn that able spirit affords In polish'd form of well-refined pen.
Hearing you praised, I say ''Tis so, 'tis true,' And to the most of praise add something more; But that is in my thought, whose love to you,
Though words come hindmost, holds his rank before. Then others for the breath of words respect,
Me for my dumb thoughts, speaking in effect.




 Was it the proud full sail of his great verse, Bound for the prize of all too precious you,
That did my ripe thoughts in my brain inhearse, Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew? Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write
Above a mortal pitch, that struck me dead? No, neither he, nor his compeers by night Giving him aid, my verse astonished.
He, nor that affable familiar ghost Which nightly gulls him with intelligence As victors of my silence cannot boast;
I was not sick of any fear from thence:
But when your countenance fill'd up his line, Then lack'd I matter; that enfeebled mine.




 Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing, And like enough thou know'st thy estimate: The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing; My bonds in thee are all determinate.
For how do I hold thee but by thy granting? And for that riches where is my deserving? The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting, And so my patent back again is swerving.
Thyself thou gavest, thy own worth then not knowing, Or me, to whom thou gavest it, else mistaking;
So thy great gift, upon misprision growing, Comes home again, on better judgment making. Thus have I had thee, as a dream doth flatter, In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.




 When thou shalt be disposed to set me light, And place my merit in the eye of scorn,
Upon thy side against myself I'll fight,
And prove thee virtuous, though thou art forsworn. With mine own weakness being best acquainted, Upon thy part I can set down a story
Of faults conceal'd, wherein I am attainted, That thou in losing me shalt win much glory: And I by this will be a gainer too;
For bending all my loving thoughts on thee, The injuries that to myself I do,
Doing thee vantage, double-vantage me. Such is my love, to thee I so belong,
That for thy right myself will bear all wrong.


Frame

Those hours, that with gentle work did frame The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell, Will play the tyrants to the very same
And that unfair which fairly doth excel; For never-resting time leads summer on
To hideous winter, and confounds him there;
Sap checked with frost, and lusty leaves quite gone, Beauty o'er-snowed and bareness every where: Then were not summer's distillation left,
A liquid prisoner pent in walls of glass, Beauty's effect with beauty were bereft, Nor it, nor no remembrance what it was:
But flowers distill'd, though they with winter meet, Leese but their show; their substance still lives sweet.




 Then let not winter's ragged hand deface In thee thy summer, ere thou be distill'd:
Make sweet some vial; treasure thou some place With beauty's treasure, ere it be self-kill'd.
That use is not forbidden usury,
Which happies those that pay the willing loan; That's for thyself to breed another thee,
Or ten times happier, be it ten for one;
Ten times thyself were happier than thou art, If ten of thine ten times refigured thee:
Then what could death do, if thou shouldst depart, Leaving thee living in posterity?
Be not self-will'd, for thou art much too fair
To be death's conquest and make worms thine heir.




 Lo! in the orient when the gracious light Lifts up his burning head, each under eye Doth homage to his new-appearing sight, Serving with looks his sacred majesty;
And having climb'd the steep-up heavenly hill, Resembling strong youth in his middle age, yet mortal looks adore his beauty still, Attending on his golden pilgrimage;
But when from highmost pitch, with weary car, Like feeble age, he reeleth from the day,
The eyes, 'fore duteous, now converted are From his low tract and look another way: So thou, thyself out-going in thy noon, Unlook'd on diest, unless thou get a son.




 Music to hear, why hear'st thou music sadly? Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy.
Why lovest thou that which thou receivest not gladly, Or else receivest with pleasure thine annoy?
If the true concord of well-tuned sounds, By unions married, do offend thine ear,
They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds In singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear. Mark how one string, sweet husband to another, Strikes each in each by mutual ordering, Resembling sire and child and happy mother Who all in one, one pleasing note do sing:
Whose speechless song, being many, seeming one, Sings this to thee: 'thou single wilt prove none.'




 For shame! deny that thou bear'st love to any, Who for thyself art so unprovident.
Grant, if thou wilt, thou art beloved of many, But that thou none lovest is most evident;
For thou art so possess'd with murderous hate That 'gainst thyself thou stick'st not to conspire. Seeking that beauteous roof to ruinate
Which to repair should be thy chief desire.
O, change thy thought, that I may change my mind! Shall hate be fairer lodged than gentle love?
Be, as thy presence is, gracious and kind, Or to thyself at least kind-hearted prove: Make thee another self, for love of me, That beauty still may live in thine or thee.




 Then hate me when thou wilt; if ever, now; Now, while the world is bent my deeds to cross, Join with the spite of fortune, make me bow, And do not drop in for an after-loss:
Ah, do not, when my heart hath 'scoped this sorrow, Come in the rearward of a conquer'd woe;
Give not a windy night a rainy morrow, To linger out a purposed overthrow.
If thou wilt leave me, do not leave me last, When other petty griefs have done their spite But in the onset come; so shall I taste
At first the very worst of fortune's might,
And other strains of woe, which now seem woe, Compared with loss of thee will not seem so.




 Some glory in their birth, some in their skill, Some in their wealth, some in their bodies' force, Some in their garments, though new-fangled ill,
Some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse; And every humour hath his adjunct pleasure,
Wherein it finds a joy above the rest:
But these particulars are not my measure; All these I better in one general best.
Thy love is better than high birth to me,
Richer than wealth, prouder than garments' cost, Of more delight than hawks or horses be;
And having thee, of all men's pride I boast: Wretched in this alone, that thou mayst take All this away and me most wretched make.




 So shall I live, supposing thou art true, Like a deceived husband; so love's face
May still seem love to me, though alter'd new; Thy looks with me, thy heart in other place: For there can live no hatred in thine eye, Therefore in that I cannot know thy change.
In many's looks the false heart's history
Is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange, But heaven in thy creation did decree
That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell; Whate'er thy thoughts or thy heart's workings be, Thy looks should nothing thence but sweetness tell. How like Eve's apple doth thy beauty grow,
if thy sweet virtue answer not thy show!


Do None

They that have power to hurt and will do none, That do not do the thing they most do show, Who, moving others, are themselves as stone, Unmoved, cold, and to temptation slow:
They rightly do inherit heaven's graces
And husband nature's riches from expense; They are the lords and owners of their faces, Others but stewards of their excellence.
The summer's flower is to the summer sweet Though to itself it only live and die,
But if that flower with base infection meet, The basest weed outbraves his dignity:
For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds; Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds.




The forward violet thus did I chide:
Sweet thief, whence didst thou steal thy sweet that smells, If not from my love's breath? The purple pride
Which on thy soft cheek for complexion dwells In my love's veins thou hast too grossly dyed. The lily I condemned for thy hand,
And buds of marjoram had stol'n thy hair: The roses fearfully on thorns did stand,
One blushing shame, another white despair; A third, nor red nor white, had stol'n of both And to his robbery had annex'd thy breath; But, for his theft, in pride of all his growth
A vengeful canker eat him up to death. More flowers I noted, yet I none could see But sweet or colour it had stol'n from thee.




 How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame Which, like a canker in the fragrant rose,
Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name! O, in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose! That tongue that tells the story of thy days, Making lascivious comments on thy sport, Cannot dispraise but in a kind of praise; Naming thy name blesses an ill report.
O, what a mansion have those vices got Which for their habitation chose out thee, Where beauty's veil doth cover every blot, And all things turn to fair that eyes can see! Take heed, dear heart, of this large privilege; The hardest knife ill-used doth lose his edge.




 Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonness; Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport; Both grace and faults are loved of more and less; Thou makest faults graces that to thee resort.
As on the finger of a throned queen The basest jewel will be well esteem'd,
So are those errors that in thee are seen
To truths translated and for true things deem'd. How many lambs might the stem wolf betray, If like a lamb he could his looks translate!
How many gazers mightst thou lead away,
If thou wouldst use the strength of all thy state! But do not so; I love thee in such sort
As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report.




 How like a winter hath my absence been From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year!
What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen! What old December's bareness every where!
And yet this time removed was summer's time, The teeming autumn, big with rich increase, Bearing the wanton burden of the prime,
Like widow'd wombs after their lords' decease: Yet this abundant issue seem'd to me
But hope of orphans and unfather'd fruit; For summer and his pleasures wait on thee, And, thou away, the very birds are mute; Or, if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer
That leaves look pale, dreading the winter's near.




 From you have I been absent in the spring, When proud-pied April dress'd in all his trim Hath put a spirit of youth in every thing,
That heavy Saturn laugh'd and leap'd with him. Yet nor the lays of birds nor the sweet smell
Of different flowers in odour and in hue Could make me any summer's story tell,
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew; Nor did I wonder at the lily's white,
Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose; They were but sweet, but figures of delight, Drawn after you, you pattern of all those.
Yet seem'd it winter still, and, you away, As with your shadow I with these did play:




 As fast as thou shalt wane, so fast thou growest In one of thine, from that which thou departest; And that fresh blood which youngly thou bestowest
Thou mayst call thine when thou from youth convertest. Herein lives wisdom, beauty and increase:
Without this, folly, age and cold decay:
If all were minded so, the times should cease And threescore year would make the world away. Let those whom Nature hath not made for store, Harsh featureless and rude, barrenly perish:
Look, whom she best endow'd she gave the more; Which bounteous gift thou shouldst in bounty cherish: She carved thee for her seal, and meant thereby Thou shouldst print more, not let that copy die.




 When I do count the clock that tells the time, And see the brave day sunk in hideous night; When I behold the violet past prime,
And sable curls all silver'd o'er with white; When lofty trees I see barren of leaves Which erst from heat did canopy the herd, And summer's green all girded up in sheaves
Borne on the bier with white and bristly beard, Then of thy beauty do I question make,
That thou among the wastes of time must go, Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake And die as fast as they see others grow;
And nothing 'gainst Time's scythe can make defence Save breed, to brave him when he takes thee hence.




 O, that you were yourself! but, love, you are No longer yours than you yourself here live: Against this coming end you should prepare, And your sweet semblance to some other give. So should that beauty which you hold in lease Find no determination: then you were
Yourself again after yourself's decease,
When your sweet issue your sweet form should bear. Who lets so fair a house fall to decay,
Which husbandry in honour might uphold Against the stormy gusts of winter's day And barren rage of death's eternal cold?
O, none but unthrifts! Dear my love, you know You had a father: let your son say so.




 Not from the stars do I my judgment pluck; And yet methinks I have astronomy,
But not to tell of good or evil luck,
Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons' quality; Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell, Pointing to each his thunder, rain and wind, Or say with princes if it shall go well,
By oft predict that I in heaven find:
But from thine eyes my knowledge I derive, And, constant stars, in them I read such art As truth and beauty shall together thrive,
If from thyself to store thou wouldst convert; Or else of thee this I prognosticate:
Thy end is truth's and beauty's doom and date.


Paws

Devouring Time, blunt thou the lion's paws,
And make the earth devour her own sweet brood; Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger's jaws, And burn the long-liv'd Phoenix in her blood; Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleets,
And do whate'er thou wilt, swift-footed Time, To the wide world and all her fading sweets; But I forbid thee one more heinous crime:
O, carve not with the hours my love's fair brow, Nor draw no lines there with thine antique pen! Him in thy course untainted do allow
For beauty's pattern to succeeding men.
Yet do thy worst, old Time! Despite thy wrong My love shall in my verse ever live young.




 Take all my loves, my love, yea, take them all; What hast thou then more than thou hadst before? No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call; All mine was thine before thou hadst this more.
Then if for my love thou my love receivest, I cannot blame thee for my love thou usest; But yet be blamed, if thou thyself deceivest By wilful taste of what thyself refusest.
I do forgive thy robbery, gentle thief, Although thou steal thee all my poverty; And yet, love knows, it is a greater grief
To bear love's wrong than hate's known injury. Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows, Kill me with spites; yet we must not be foes.




 Those petty wrongs that liberty commits, When I am sometime absent from thy heart, Thy beauty and thy years full well befits,
For still temptation follows where thou art. Gentle thou art and therefore to be won, Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assailed; And when a woman woos, what woman's son Will sourly leave her till she have prevailed? Ay me! but yet thou mightest my seat forbear, And chide try beauty and thy straying youth, Who lead thee in their riot even there
Where thou art forced to break a twofold truth, Hers by thy beauty tempting her to thee, Thine, by thy beauty being false to me.




 That thou hast her, it is not all my grief, And yet it may be said I loved her dearly; That she hath thee, is of my wailing chief, A loss in love that touches me more nearly. Loving offenders, thus I will excuse ye:
Thou dost love her, because thou knowst I love her; And for my sake even so doth she abuse me, Suffering my friend for my sake to approve her.
If I lose thee, my loss is my love's gain,
And losing her, my friend hath found that loss; Both find each other, and I lose both twain, And both for my sake lay on me this cross: But here's the joy; my friend and I are one; Sweet flattery! then she loves but me alone.




 When most I wink, then do mine eyes best see, For all the day they view things unrespected; But when I sleep, in dreams they look on thee, And darkly bright are bright in dark directed.
Then thou, whose shadow shadows doth make bright, How would thy shadow's form form happy show
To the clear day with thy much clearer light, When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so! How would, I say, mine eyes be blessed made By looking on thee in the living day,
When in dead night thy fair imperfect shade Through heavy sleep on sightless eyes doth stay! All days are nights to see till I see thee,
And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me.




 If the dull substance of my flesh were thought, Injurious distance should not stop my way;
For then despite of space I would be brought, From limits far remote where thou dost stay. No matter then although my foot did stand Upon the farthest earth removed from thee; For nimble thought can jump both sea and land As soon as think the place where he would be. But ah! thought kills me that I am not thought,
To leap large lengths of miles when thou art gone, But that so much of earth and water wrought
I must attend time's leisure with my moan, Receiving nought by elements so slow
But heavy tears, badges of either's woe.




 Against that time, if ever that time come, When I shall see thee frown on my defects, When as thy love hath cast his utmost sum, Call'd to that audit by advised respects;
Against that time when thou shalt strangely pass And scarcely greet me with that sun thine eye, When love, converted from the thing it was, Shall reasons find of settled gravity,--
Against that time do I ensconce me here Within the knowledge of mine own desert, And this my hand against myself uprear, To guard the lawful reasons on thy part:
To leave poor me thou hast the strength of laws, Since why to love I can allege no cause.




 The other two, slight air and purging fire, Are both with thee, wherever I abide;
The first my thought, the other my desire, These present-absent with swift motion slide. For when these quicker elements are gone
In tender embassy of love to thee,
My life, being made of four, with two alone
Sinks down to death, oppress'd with melancholy; Until life's composition be recured
By those swift messengers return'd from thee, Who even but now come back again, assured Of thy fair health, recounting it to me:
This told, I joy; but then no longer glad,
I send them back again and straight grow sad.




 Mine eye and heart are at a mortal war How to divide the conquest of thy sight;
Mine eye my heart thy picture's sight would bar, My heart mine eye the freedom of that right.
My heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie-- A closet never pierced with crystal eyes--
But the defendant doth that plea deny And says in him thy fair appearance lies. To 'cide this title is impanneled
A quest of thoughts, all tenants to the heart, And by their verdict is determined
The clear eye's moiety and the dear heart's part: As thus; mine eye's due is thy outward part, And my heart's right thy inward love of heart.




 Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is took, And each doth good turns now unto the other: When that mine eye is famish'd for a look,
Or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother, With my love's picture then my eye doth feast And to the painted banquet bids my heart; Another time mine eye is my heart's guest
And in his thoughts of love doth share a part: So, either by thy picture or my love,
Thyself away art resent still with me;
For thou not farther than my thoughts canst move, And I am still with them and they with thee;
Or, if they sleep, thy picture in my sight Awakes my heart to heart's and eye's delight.




 How careful was I, when I took my way, Each trifle under truest bars to thrust, That to my use it might unused stay
From hands of falsehood, in sure wards of trust! But thou, to whom my jewels trifles are,
Most worthy of comfort, now my greatest grief, Thou, best of dearest and mine only care,
Art left the prey of every vulgar thief. Thee have I not lock'd up in any chest,
Save where thou art not, though I feel thou art, Within the gentle closure of my breast,
From whence at pleasure thou mayst come and part; And even thence thou wilt be stol'n, I fear,
For truth proves thievish for a prize so dear.




When I consider everything that grows Holds in perfection but a little moment,
That this huge stage presenteth nought but shows Whereon the stars in secret influence comment; When I perceive that men as plants increase, Cheered and check'd even by the selfsame sky, Vaunt in their youthful sap, at height decrease, And wear their brave state out of memory;
Then the conceit of this inconstant stay
Sets you most rich in youth before my sight, Where wasteful Time debateth with Decay To change your day of youth to sullied night; And all in war with Time for love of you,
As he takes from you, I engraft you new. 


 But wherefore do not you a mightier way Make war upon this bloody tyrant, Time? And fortify yourself in your decay
With means more blessed than my barren rhyme? Now stand you on the top of happy hours,
And many maiden gardens yet unset
With virtuous wish would bear your living flowers, Much liker than your painted counterfeit:
So should the lines of life that life repair, Which this, Time's pencil, or my pupil pen, Neither in inward worth nor outward fair, Can make you live yourself in eyes of men. To give away yourself keeps yourself still,
And you must live, drawn by your own sweet skill.




 Who will believe my verse in time to come, If it were fill'd with your most high deserts?
Though yet, heaven knows, it is but as a tomb Which hides your life and shows not half your parts. If I could write the beauty of your eyes
And in fresh numbers number all your graces, The age to come would say 'This poet lies:
Such heavenly touches ne'er touch'd earthly faces.' So should my papers yellow'd with their age
Be scorn'd like old men of less truth than tongue, And your true rights be term'd a poet's rage
And stretched metre of an antique song:
But were some child of yours alive that time, You should live twice; in it and in my rhyme.


Day?

Shall I compare thee to a summer's day? Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May, And summer's lease hath all too short a date: Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines, And often is his gold complexion dimm'd;
And every fair from fair sometime declines,
By chance or nature's changing course untrimm'd; But thy eternal summer shall not fade
Nor lose possession of that fair thou owest;
Nor shall Death brag thou wander'st in his shade, When in eternal lines to time thou growest:
So long as men can breathe or eyes can see, So long lives this and this gives life to thee.




A woman's face with Nature's own hand painted Hast thou, the master-mistress of my passion; A woman's gentle heart, but not acquainted
With shifting change, as is false women's fashion; An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling, Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth;
A man in hue, all 'hues' in his controlling,
Much steals men's eyes and women's souls amazeth. And for a woman wert thou first created;
Till Nature, as she wrought thee, fell a-doting, And by addition me of thee defeated,
By adding one thing to my purpose nothing.
But since she prick'd thee out for women's pleasure, Mine be thy love and thy love's use their treasure.




 So is it not with me as with that Muse Stirr'd by a painted beauty to his verse, Who heaven itself for ornament doth use And every fair with his fair doth rehearse Making a couplement of proud compare,
With sun and moon, with earth and sea's rich gems, With April's first-born flowers, and all things rare That heaven's air in this huge rondure hems.
O' let me, true in love, but truly write, And then believe me, my love is as fair
As any mother's child, though not so bright As those gold candles fix'd in heaven's air: Let them say more than like of hearsay well; I will not praise that purpose not to sell.




 My glass shall not persuade me I am old, So long as youth and thou are of one date; But when in thee time's furrows I behold, Then look I death my days should expiate. For all that beauty that doth cover thee
Is but the seemly raiment of my heart, Which in thy breast doth live, as thine in me: How can I then be elder than thou art?
O, therefore, love, be of thyself so wary As I, not for myself, but for thee will;
Bearing thy heart, which I will keep so chary As tender nurse her babe from faring ill.
Presume not on thy heart when mine is slain; Thou gavest me thine, not to give back again.




 Full many a glorious morning have I seen Flatter the mountain-tops with sovereign eye, Kissing with golden face the meadows green, Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy; Anon permit the basest clouds to ride
With ugly rack on his celestial face,
And from the forlorn world his visage hide, Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace: Even so my sun one early morn did shine With all triumphant splendor on my brow; But out, alack! he was but one hour mine;
The region cloud hath mask'd him from me now. Yet him for this my love no whit disdaineth;
Suns of the world may stain when heaven's sun staineth.




 Mine eye hath play'd the painter and hath stell'd Thy beauty's form in table of my heart;
My body is the frame wherein 'tis held, And perspective it is the painter's art.
For through the painter must you see his skill, To find where your true image pictured lies; Which in my bosom's shop is hanging still, That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes.
Now see what good turns eyes for eyes have done: Mine eyes have drawn thy shape, and thine for me Are windows to my breast, where-through the sun Delights to peep, to gaze therein on thee;
Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art; They draw but what they see, know not the heart.


Men's Eyes

When, in disgrace with fortune and men's eyes, I all alone beweep my outcast state
And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries And look upon myself and curse my fate, Wishing me like to one more rich in hope, Featur'd like him, like him with friends possess'd, Desiring this man's art and that man's scope, With what I most enjoy contented least;
Yet in these thoughts myself almost despising, Haply I think on thee, and then my state,
Like to the lark at break of day arising
From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven's gate; For thy sweet love remember'd such wealth brings That then I scorn to change my state with kings.




 Lord of my love, to whom in vassalage Thy merit hath my duty strongly knit, To thee I send this written embassage, To witness duty, not to show my wit:
Duty so great, which wit so poor as mine
May make seem bare, in wanting words to show it, But that I hope some good conceit of thine
In thy soul's thought, all naked, will bestow it; Till whatsoever star that guides my moving Points on me graciously with fair aspect
And puts apparel on my tatter'd loving, To show me worthy of thy sweet respect:
Then may I dare to boast how I do love thee;
Till then not show my head where thou mayst prove me.




 Weary with toil, I haste me to my bed, The dear repose for limbs with travel tired; But then begins a journey in my head,
To work my mind, when body's work's expired: For then my thoughts, from far where I abide, Intend a zealous pilgrimage to thee,
And keep my drooping eyelids open wide, Looking on darkness which the blind do see Save that my soul's imaginary sight Presents thy shadow to my sightless view, Which, like a jewel hung in ghastly night,
Makes black night beauteous and her old face new. Lo! thus, by day my limbs, by night my mind,
For thee and for myself no quiet find.




 How can I then return in happy plight, That am debarr'd the benefit of rest?
When day's oppression is not eased by night, But day by night, and night by day, oppress'd? And each, though enemies to either's reign, Do in consent shake hands to torture me;
The one by toil, the other to complain How far I toil, still farther off from thee.
I tell the day, to please them thou art bright
And dost him grace when clouds do blot the heaven: So flatter I the swart-complexion'd night,
When sparkling stars twire not thou gild'st the even. But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer
And night doth nightly make grief's strength seem stronger.


Thought

When to the sessions of sweet silent thought I summon up remembrance of things past,
I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought,
And with old woes new wail my dear times' waste; Then can I drown an eye, unus'd to flow,
For precious friends hid in death's dateless night, And weep afresh love's long since cancell'd woe, And moan the expense of many a vanish'd sight: Then can I grieve at grievances foregone,
And heavily from woe to woe tell o'er
The sad account of fore-bemoan d moan, Which I new pay as if not paid before.
But if the while I think on thee, dear friend, All losses are restor'd and sorrows end.




 Thy bosom is endeared with all hearts, Which I by lacking have supposed dead,
And there reigns love and all love's loving parts, And all those friends which I thought buried.
How many a holy and obsequious tear
Hath dear religious love stol'n from mine eye As interest of the dead, which now appear But things removed that hidden in thee lie!
Thou art the grave where buried love doth live, Hung with the trophies of my lovers gone,
Who all their parts of me to thee did give; That due of many now is thine alone: Their images I loved I view in thee,
And thou, all they, hast all the all of me.




If thou survive my well-contented day,
When that churl Death my bones with dust shall cover, And shalt by fortune once more re-survey
These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover, Compare them with the bettering of the time, And though they be outstripp'd by every pen, Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme, Exceeded by the height of happier men.
O then vouchsafe me but this loving thought:
"Had my friend's Muse grown with this growing age A dearer birth than this his love had brought,
To march in ranks of better equipage: But since he died and poets better prove,
Theirs for their style I'll read, his for his love." 


 Full many a glorious morning have I seen Flatter the mountain-tops with sovereign eye, Kissing with golden face the meadows green, Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy; Anon permit the basest clouds to ride
With ugly rack on his celestial face,
And from the forlorn world his visage hide, Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace: Even so my sun one early morn did shine With all triumphant splendor on my brow; But out, alack! he was but one hour mine;
The region cloud hath mask'd him from me now. Yet him for this my love no whit disdaineth;
Suns of the world may stain when heaven's sun staineth.




 Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day, And make me travel forth without my cloak,
To let base clouds o'ertake me in my way, Hiding thy bravery in their rotten smoke?
'Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break, To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face,
For no man well of such a salve can speak
That heals the wound and cures not the disgrace: Nor can thy shame give physic to my grief; Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss:
The offender's sorrow lends but weak relief To him that bears the strong offence's cross.
Ah! but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds, And they are rich and ransom all ill deeds.




 O, how thy worth with manners may I sing, When thou art all the better part of me?
What can mine own praise to mine own self bring? And what is 't but mine own when I praise thee?
Even for this let us divided live,
And our dear love lose name of single one, That by this separation I may give
That due to thee which thou deservest alone.
O absence, what a torment wouldst thou prove, Were it not thy sour leisure gave sweet leave To entertain the time with thoughts of love,
Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive, And that thou teachest how to make one twain, By praising him here who doth hence remain!




 No more be grieved at that which thou hast done: Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud; Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun,
And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud. All men make faults, and even I in this, Authorizing thy trespass with compare, Myself corrupting, salving thy amiss, Excusing thy sins more than thy sins are; For to thy sensual fault I bring in sense-- Thy adverse party is thy advocate--
And 'gainst myself a lawful plea commence: Such civil war is in my love and hate
That I an accessary needs must be
To that sweet thief which sourly robs from me.




 Let me confess that we two must be twain, Although our undivided loves are one:
So shall those blots that do with me remain Without thy help by me be borne alone.
In our two loves there is but one respect, Though in our lives a separable spite, Which though it alter not love's sole effect,
Yet doth it steal sweet hours from love's delight. I may not evermore acknowledge thee,
Lest my bewailed guilt should do thee shame, Nor thou with public kindness honour me, Unless thou take that honour from thy name: But do not so; I love thee in such sort
As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report.




As a decrepit father takes delight
To see his active child do deeds of youth, So I, made lame by fortune's dearest spite, Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth. For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit, Or any of these all, or all, or more,
Entitled in thy parts do crowned sit,
I make my love engrafted to this store:
So then I am not lame, poor, nor despised, Whilst that this shadow doth such substance give That I in thy abundance am sufficed
And by a part of all thy glory live.
Look, what is best, that best I wish in thee: This wish I have; then ten times happy me!


Invent

How can my muse want subject to invent,
While thou dost breathe, that pour'st into my verse Thine own sweet argument, too excellent
For every vulgar paper to rehearse?
O! give thy self the thanks, if aught in me Worthy perusal stand against thy sight;
For who's so dumb that cannot write to thee, When thou thy self dost give invention light?
Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth Than those old nine which rhymers invocate; And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth Eternal numbers to outlive long date.
If my slight muse do please these curious days, The pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise.


There

 Alas, 'tis true I have gone here and there And made myself a motley to the view,
Gor'd mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear, Made old offences of affections new.
Most true it is that I have look'd on truth Askance and strangely: but, by all above, These blenches gave my heart another youth, And worse essays prov'd thee my best of love. Now all is done, have what shall have no end!
Mine appetite, I never more will grind On newer proof, to try an older friend, A god in love, to whom I am confin'd.
Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best, Even to thy pure and most most loving breast.


Earth

 Poor soul, the centre of my sinful earth, [......] these rebel powers that thee array, Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth, Painting thy outward walls so costly gay?
Why so large cost, having so short a lease, Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend? Shall worms, inheritors of this excess,
Eat up thy charge? Is this thy body's end? Then soul, live thou upon thy servant's loss
And let that pine to aggravate thy store; Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross; Within be fed, without be rich no more.
So shalt thou feed on Death, that feeds on men, And, Death once dead, there's no more dying then.


Minds

 Let me not to the marriage of true minds Admit impediments. Love is not love Which alters when it alteration finds,
Or bends with the remover to remove. O no! it is an ever-fixed mark
That looks on tempests and is never shaken; It is the star to every wand'ring bark,
Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken. Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks
Within his bending sickle's compass come; Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks, But bears it out even to the edge of doom.
If this be error and upon me prov'd, I never writ, nor no man ever lov'd.




SHALL I compare thee to a Summer's day? Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May, And Summer's lease hath all too short a date:
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines, And often is his gold complexion dimm'd; And every fair from fair sometime declines,
By chance or nature's changing course untrimm'd: But thy eternal Summer shall not fade
Nor lose possession of that fair thou owest;
Nor shall Death brag thou wanderest in his shade, When in eternal lines to time thou growest:
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;So long as men can breathe, or eyes can see, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.




WHEN, in disgrace with Fortune and men's eyes, I all alone beweep my outcast state,
And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries, And look upon myself, and curse my fate, Wishing me like to one more rich in hope, Featured like him, like him with friends possest, Desiring this man's art and that man's scope, With what I most enjoy contented least;
Yet in these thoughts myself almost despising-- Haply I think on thee: and then my state,
Like to the Lark at break of day arising
From sullen earth, sings hymns at Heaven's gate; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;For thy sweet love rememb'red such wealth brings &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;That then I scorn to change my state with Kings.




WHEN to the Sessions of sweet silent thought I summon up remembrance of things past,
I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought,
And with old woes new wail my dear time's waste: Then can I drown an eye, unused to flow,
For precious friends hid in death's dateless night, And weep afresh love's long-since-cancell'd woe, And moan th' expense of many a vanish'd sight: Then can I grieve at grievances foregone,
And heavily from woe to woe tell o'er
The sad account of fore-bemoaned moan, Which I new pay as if not paid before.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;But if the while I think on thee, dear friend, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;All losses are restored and sorrows end.




THY bosom is endeared with all hearts Which I, by lacking, have supposed dead:
And there reigns Love, and all Love's loving parts, And all those friends which I thought buried.
How many a holy and obsequious tear
Hath dear religious love stol'n from mine eye, As interest of the dead!--which now appear But things removed that hidden in thee lie.
Thou art the grave where buried love doth live, Hung with the trophies of my lovers gone,
Who all their parts of me to thee did give:
--That due of many now is thine alone: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Their images I loved I view in thee, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And thou, all they, hast all the all of me.

WHAT is your substance, whereof are you made, That millions of strange shadows on you tend?
Since every one hath, every one, one shade, And you, but one, can every shadow lend.
Describe Adonis, and the counterfeit Is poorly imitated after you;
On Helen's cheek all art of beauty set, And you in Grecian tires are painted new:
Speak of the spring and foison of the year, The one doth shadow of your beauty show, The other as your bounty doth appear; And you in every blessed shape we know.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In all external grace you have some part, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;But you like none, none you, for constant heart.




FAREWELL! thou art too dear for my possessing, And like enough thou know'st thy estimate:
The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing; My bonds in thee are all determinate.
For how do I hold thee but by thy granting? And for that riches where is my deserving? The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting, And so my patent back again is swerving.
Thyself thou gav'st, thy own worth then not knowing, Or me, to whom thou gav'st it, else mistaking;
So thy great gift, upon misprision growing, Comes home again, on better judgment making.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Thus have I had thee, as a dream doth flatter &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In sleep a King; but waking, no such matter.


You Made

 What is your substance, whereof are you made, That millions of strange shadows on you tend?
Since everyone hath, everyone, one shade, And you, but one, can every shadow lend. Describe Adonis, and the counterfeit
Is poorly imitated after you;
On Helen's cheek all art of beauty set, And you in Grecian tires are painted new.
 Speak of the spring and foison of the year, The one doth shadow of your beauty show, The other as your bounty doth appear;
And you in every blessed shape we know. In all external grace you have some part,
 But you like none, none you, for constant heart. 
Pebbl'D Shor

 Like as the waves make towards the pebbl'd shore, So do our minutes hasten to their end;
Each changing place with that which goes before, In sequent toil all forwards do contend.
Nativity, once in the main of light,
Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crown'd, Crooked eclipses 'gainst his glory fight,
And Time that gave doth now his gift confound. Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth
And delves the parallels in beauty's brow, Feeds on the rarities of nature's truth,
And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow: And yet to times in hope my verse shall stand, Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand.




I.
IT was a lording's daughter, the fairest one of three, That liked of her master as well as well might be,
Till looking on an Englishman, the fair'st that eye could see, Her fancy fell a-turning.

Long was the combat doubtful that love with love did fight, To leave the master loveless, or kill the gallant knight:
To put in practise either, alas, it was a spite Unto the silly damsel!

But one must be refused; more mickle was the pain That nothing could be used to turn them both to gain,
For of the two the trusty knight was wounded with disdain: Alas, she could not help it!

Thus art with arms contending was victor of the day, Which by a gift of learning did bear the maid away: Then, lullaby, the learned man hath got the lady gay; For now my song is ended.

II.
On a day, alack the day!
Love, whose month was ever May, Spied a blossom passing fair, Playing in the wanton air:
Through the velvet leaves the wind All unseen, gan passage find;
That the lover, sick to death, Wish'd himself the heaven's breath,
'Air,' quoth he, 'thy cheeks may blow; Air, would I might triumph so!
But, alas! my hand hath sworn Ne'er to pluck thee from thy thorn: Vow, alack! for youth unmeet: Youth, so apt to pluck a sweet.
Thou for whom Jove would swear Juno but an Ethiope were; Turning mortal for thy love.'
III.
My flocks feed not, My ewes breed not, My rams speed not, All is amiss:
Love's denying, Faith's defying, Heart's renying, Causer of this.
All my merry jigs are quite forgot, All my lady's love is lost, God wot:
Where her faith was firmly fix'd in love, There a nay is placed without remove. One silly cross
Wrought all my loss;
O frowning Fortune, cursed, fickle dame! For now I see
Inconstancy
More in women than in men remain. In black mourn I,
All fears scorn I, Love hath forlorn me, Living in thrall:
Heart is bleeding, All help needing, O cruel speeding,
Fraughted with gall.
My shepherd's pipe can sound no deal; My wether's bell rings doleful knell;
My curtail dog, that wont to have play'd Plays not at all, but seems afraid;
My sighs so deep Procure to weep,
In howling wise, to see my doleful plight. How sighs resound
Through heartless ground,
Like a thousand vanquish'd men in bloody fight! Clear wells spring not,
Sweet birds sing not, Green plants bring not Forth their dye;
Herds stand weeping, Flocks all sleeping, Nymphs back peeping Fearfully:
All our pleasure known to us poor swains, All our merry meetings on the plains,
All our evening sport from us is fled, All our love is lost, for Love is dead Farewell, sweet lass,
Thy like ne'er was
For a sweet content, the cause of all my moan: Poor Corydon
Must live alone;
Other help for him I see that there is none.

IV.
When as thine eye hath chose the dame, And stall'd the deer that thou shouldst strike, Let reason rule things worthy blame,
As well as fancy partial might: Take counsel of some wiser head, Neither too young nor yet unwed.

And when thou comest thy tale to tell, Smooth not thy tongue with filed talk, Lest she some subtle practise smell,-- A cripple soon can find a halt;--
But plainly say thou lovest her well,

And set thy person forth to sell.
What though her frowning brows be bent, Her cloudy looks will calm ere night:
And then too late she will repent That thus dissembled her delight; And twice desire, ere it be day,
That which with scorn she put away.

What though she strive to try her strength, And ban and brawl, and say thee nay,
Her feeble force will yield at length, When craft hath taught her thus to say, 'Had women been so strong as men,
In faith, you had not had it then.'

And to her will frame all thy ways; Spare not to spend, and chiefly there Where thy desert may merit praise, By ringing in thy lady's ear:
The strongest castle, tower, and town, The golden bullet beats it down.

Serve always with assured trust, And in thy suit be humble true; Unless thy lady prove unjust, Press never thou to choose anew:
When time shall serve, be thou not slack To proffer, though she put thee back.

The wiles and guiles that women work, Dissembled with an outward show, The tricks and toys that in them lurk,
The cock that treads them shall not know. Have you not heard it said full oft,
A woman's nay doth stand for nought?

Think women still to strive with men, To sin and never for to saint:
There is no heaven, by holy then, When time with age doth them attaint. Were kisses all the joys in bed,
One woman would another wed.

But, soft! enough, too much, I fear Lest that my mistress hear my song,
She will not stick to round me i' the ear, To teach my tongue to be so long:
Yet will she blush, here be it said, To hear her secrets so bewray'd.

V.
Live with me, and be my love, And we will all the pleasures prove
That hills and valleys, dales and fields, And all the craggy mountains yields.
There will we sit upon the rocks,
And see the shepherds feed their flocks, By shallow rivers, by whose falls Melodious birds sing madrigals.

There will I make thee a bed of roses, With a thousand fragrant posies,
A cap of flowers, and a kirtle Embroider'd all with leaves of myrtle.

A belt of straw and ivy buds,
With coral clasps and amber studs; And if these pleasures may thee move, Then live with me and be my love.

LOVE'S ANSWER.

If that the world and love were young, And truth in every shepherd's tongue, These pretty pleasures might me move To live with thee and be thy love.

VI.
As it fell upon a day
In the merry month of May, Sitting in a pleasant shade Which a grove of myrtles made,
Beasts did leap, and birds did sing, Trees did grow, and plants did spring; Every thing did banish moan,
Save the nightingale alone: She, poor bird, as all forlorn, Lean'd her breast up-till a thorn
And there sung the dolefull'st ditty, That to hear it was great pity:
'Fie, fie, fie,' now would she cry; 'Tereu, tereu!' by and by;
That to hear her so complain, Scarce I could from tears refrain; For her griefs, so lively shown, Made me think upon mine own.
Ah, thought I, thou mourn'st in vain! None takes pity on thy pain:
Senseless trees they cannot hear thee; Ruthless beasts they will not cheer thee: King Pandion he is dead;
All thy friends are lapp'd in lead; All thy fellow birds do sing, Careless of thy sorrowing.
Even so, poor bird, like thee, None alive will pity me.
Whilst as fickle Fortune smiled, Thou and I were both beguiled. Every one that flatters thee
Is no friend in misery.
Words are easy, like the wind; Faithful friends are hard to find: Every man will be thy friend
Whilst thou hast wherewith to spend; But if store of crowns be scant,
No man will supply thy want. If that one be prodigal, Bountiful they will him call, And with such-like flattering, 'Pity but he were a king;'
If he be addict to vice, Quickly him they will entice; If to women he be bent,
They have at commandement: But if Fortune once do frown, Then farewell his great renown They that fawn'd on him before Use his company no more.
He that is thy friend indeed, He will help thee in thy need: If thou sorrow, he will weep; If thou wake, he cannot sleep; Thus of every grief in heart He with thee doth bear a part.
These are certain signs to know Faithful friend from flattering foe.



O HOW much more doth beauty beauteous seem By that sweet ornament which truth doth give!
The Rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem For that sweet odour which doth in it live. The Canker-blooms have full as deep a dye As the perfumed tincture of the Roses, Hang on such thorns, and play as wantonly
When summer's breath their masked buds discloses: But--for their virtue only is their show--
They live unwoo'd and unrespected fade, Die to themselves. Sweet Roses do not so;
Of their sweet deaths are sweetest odours made. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And so of you, beauteous and lovely youth, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;When that shall vade, my verse distils your truth.




BEING your slave, what should I do but tend Upon the hours and times of your desire?
I have no precious time at all to spend, Nor services to do, till you require.
Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for you, Nor think the bitterness of absence sour
When you have bid your servant once adieu; Nor dare I question with my jealous thought Where you may be, or your affairs suppose, But, like a sad slave, stay and think of nought
Save, where you are how happy you make those! &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;So true a fool is love, that in your Will, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Though you do any thing, he thinks no ill.




THAT time of year thou may'st in me behold When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang Upon those boughs which shake against the cold--
Bare ruin'd choirs where late the sweet birds sang, In me thou see'st the twilight of such day
As after Sunset fadeth in the West,
Which by and by black night doth take away, Death's second self, that seals up all in rest. In me thou see'st the glowing of such fire That on the ashes of his youth doth lie,
As the death-bed whereon it must expire, Consumed with that which it was nourish'd by.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;This thou perceiv'st, which makes thy love more strong &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To love that well which thou must leave ere long.




THEN hate me when thou wilt; if ever, now; Now, while the world is bent my deeds to cross, Join with the spite of fortune, make me bow, And do not drop in for an after loss:
Ah! do not, when my heart hath 'scaped this sorrow, Come in the rearward of a conquer'd woe;
Give not a windy night a rainy morrow, To linger out a purposed overthrow.
If thou wilt leave me, do not leave me last, When other petty griefs have done their spite, But in the onset come: so shall I taste
At first the very worst of fortune's might;
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And other strains of woe, which now seem woe, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Compared with loss of thee will not seem so!


Do None

 They that have power to hurt and will do none, That do not do the thing they most do show, Who, moving others, are themselves as stone, Unmoved, cold, and to temptation slow:
They rightly do inherit heaven's graces
And husband nature's riches from expense; They are the lords and owners of their faces, Others but stewards of their excellence.
 The summer's flower is to the summer sweet Though to itself it only live and die,
But if that flower with base infection meet, The basest weed outbraves his dignity:
For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds; Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds.




THEY that have power to hurt and will do none, That do not do the thing they most do show, Who, moving others, are themselves as stone, Unmoved, cold, and to temptation slow--
They rightly do inherit heaven's graces, And husband nature's riches from expense;
They are the Lords and owners of their faces, Others, but stewards of their excellence.
The summer's flower is to the summer sweet, Though to itself it only live and die;
But if that flower with base infection meet, The basest weed outbraves his dignity:
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds.




HOW like a Winter hath my absence been From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year!
What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen, What old December's bareness everywhere!
And yet this time removed was summer's time; The teeming Autumn, big with rich increase, Bearing the wanton burden of the prime
Like widow'd wombs after their Lord's decease:
Yet this abundant issue seem'd to me But hope of orphans and unfather'd fruit;
For Summer and his pleasures wait on thee, And, thou away, the very birds are mute:
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Or if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;That leaves look pale, dreading the Winter 's near.




FROM you have I been absent in the spring, When proud-pied April, dress'd in all his trim, Hath put a spirit of youth in everything,
That heavy Saturn laugh'd and leap'd with him. Yet nor the lays of birds, nor the sweet smell Of different flowers in odour and in hue,
Could make me any summer's story tell,
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew; Nor did I wonder at the Lily's white,
Nor praise the deep vermilion in the Rose; They were but sweet, but figures of delight, Drawn after you, you pattern of all those.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Yet seem'd it Winter still, and, you away, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;As with your shadow I with these did play.




MY love is strengthen'd, though more weak in seeming; I love not less, though less the show appear:
That love is merchandised whose rich esteeming The owner's tongue doth publish everywhere.
Our love was new, and then but in the spring, When I was wont to greet it with my lays;
As Philomel in summer's front doth sing And stops her pipe in growth of riper days:
Not that the summer is less pleasant now
Than when her mournful hymns did hush the night, But that wild music burthens every bough,
And sweets grown common lose their dear delight. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Therefore, like her, I sometime hold my tongue, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Because I would not dull you with my song.




TH' expense of Spirit in a waste of shame Is lust in action; and till action, lust
Is perjured, murderous, bloody, full of blame, Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust; Enjoy'd no sooner but despised straight;
Past reason hunted; and, no sooner had, Past reason hated, as a swallow'd bait On purpose laid to make the taker mad:
Mad in pursuit, and in possession so;
Had, having, and in quest to have, extreme; A bliss in proof, and proved, a very woe; Before, a joy proposed; behind, a dream.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;All this the world well knows; yet none knows well &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell.


Paws

Devouring Time, blunt thou the lion's paws,
And make the earth devour her own sweet brood; Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger's jaws, And burn the long-liv'd Phoenix in her blood; Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleets,
And do whate'er thou wilt, swift-footed Time, To the wide world and all her fading sweets; But I forbid thee one more heinous crime:
 O, carve not with the hours my love's fair brow, Nor draw no lines there with thine antique pen!
Him in thy course untainted do allow For beauty's pattern to succeeding men.
Yet do thy worst, old Time! Despite thy wrong My love shall in my verse ever live young.




TO me, fair friend, you never can be old; For as you were when first your eye I eyed,
Such seems your beauty still. Three Winters cold Have from the forests shook three Summers' pride; Three beauteous springs to yellow Autumn turn'd In process of the seasons have I seen,
Three April perfumes in three hot Junes burn'd, Since first I saw you fresh, which yet are green. Ah! yet doth beauty, like a dial-hand,
Steal from his figure, and no pace perceived;
So your sweet hue, which methinks still doth stand, Hath motion, and mine eye may be deceived:
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;For fear of which, hear this, thou age unbred: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ere you were born was beauty's summer dead.




WHEN in the chronicle of wasted time I see descriptions of the fairest wights, And beauty making beautiful old rime
In praise of Ladies dead and lovely Knights; Then, in the blazon of sweet beauty's best, Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow,
I see their antique pen would have exprest Even such a beauty as you master now.
So all their praises are but prophecies Of this our time, all you prefiguring;
And for they look'd but with divining eyes, They had not skill enough your worth to sing:
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;For we, which now behold these present days, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Have eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise.




O NEVER say that I was false of heart, Though absence seem'd my flame to qualify! As easy might I from myself depart,
As from my soul, which in thy breast doth lie: That is my home of love; if I have ranged, Like him that travels I return again,
Just to the time, not with the time exchanged, So that myself bring water for my stain.
Never believe, though in my nature reign'd All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood, That it could so prepost'rously be stain'd, To leave for nothing all thy sum of good:
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;For nothing this wide Universe I call, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Save thou, my Rose; in it thou art my all.




LET me not to the marriage of true minds Admit impediments. Love is not love Which alters when it alteration finds,
Or bends with the remover to remove:
O, no! it is an ever-fixed mark,
That looks on tempests and is never shaken; It is the star to every wand'ring bark,
Whose worth 's unknown, although his height be taken. Love 's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks Within his bending sickle's compass come;
Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks, But bears it out even to the edge of doom:--
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;If this be error and upon me proved, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I never writ, nor no man ever loved.


Day?

 Shall I compare thee to a summer's day? Thou art more lovely and more temperate. Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May, And summer's lease hath all too short a date.
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines, And often is his gold complexion dimm'd; And every fair from fair sometime declines,
By chance or nature's changing course untrimm'd; But thy eternal summer shall not fade
Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow'st;
Nor shall Death brag thou wander'st in his shade, When in eternal lines to time thou grow'st:
So long as men can breathe or eyes can see, So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.




POOR soul, the centre of my sinful earth-- My sinful earth these rebel powers array-- Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth, Painting thy outward walls so costly gay?
Why so large cost, having so short a lease, Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend? Shall worms, inheritors of this excess,
Eat up thy charge? Is this thy body's end? Then, soul, live thou upon thy servant's loss, And let that pine to aggravate thy store; Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross; Within be fed, without be rich no more:
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;So shalt thou feed on Death, that feeds on men; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And Death once dead, there 's no more dying then.


Men's Eyes

 When, in disgrace with fortune and men's eyes, I all alone beweep my outcast state
And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries And look upon myself and curse my fate, Wishing me like to one more rich in hope, Featur'd like him, like him with friends possess'd, Desiring this man's art and that man's scope, With what I most enjoy contented least;
 Yet in these thoughts myself almost despising, Haply I think on thee, and then my state,
Like to the lark at break of day arising
From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven's gate; For thy sweet love remember'd such wealth brings That then I scorn to change my state with kings.


Stars

 Let those who are in favour with their stars Of public honour and proud titles boast, Whilst I, whom fortune of such triumph bars, Unlook'd for joy in that I honour most.
Great princes' favourites their fair leaves spread But as the marigold at the sun's eye,
And in themselves their pride lies buried, For at a frown they in their glory die.
 The painful warrior famoused for fight, After a thousand victories once foil'd,
Is from the book of honour razed quite, And all the rest forgot for which he toil'd: Then happy I, that love and am beloved Where I may not remove nor be removed.


Thought

 When to the sessions of sweet silent thought I summon up remembrance of things past,
I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought,
And with old woes new wail my dear time's waste: Then can I drown an eye, unus'd to flow,
For precious friends hid in death's dateless night, And weep afresh love's long since cancell'd woe, And moan th' expense of many a vanish'd sight; Then can I grieve at grievances foregone,
And heavily from woe to woe tell o'er
The sad account of fore-bemoaned moan, Which I new pay as if not paid before.
But if the while I think on thee, dear friend, All losses are restor'd, and sorrows end.


Seen

 Full many a glorious morning have I seen Flatter the mountain-tops with sovereign eye, Kissing with golden face the meadows green, Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy; Anon permit the basest clouds to ride
With ugly rack on his celestial face
And from the forlorn world his visage hide, Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace. Even so my sun one early morn did shine
With all-triumphant splendour on my brow; But out, alack! he was but one hour mine;
The region cloud hath mask'd him from me now. Yet him for this my love no whit disdaineth;
 Suns of the world may stain when heaven's sun staineth. 
me your ears&quot;

Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears; I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him.
The evil that men do lives after them; The good is oft interred with their bones; So let it be with Caesar. The noble Brutus Hath told you Caesar was ambitious:
If it were so, it was a grievous fault, And grievously hath Caesar answer'd it.
Here, under leave of Brutus and the rest- For Brutus is an honourable man;
So are they all, all honourable men- Come I to speak in Caesar's funeral.
He was my friend, faithful and just to me: But Brutus says he was ambitious;
And Brutus is an honourable man.
He hath brought many captives home to Rome Whose ransoms did the general coffers fill: Did this in Caesar seem ambitious?
When that the poor have cried, Caesar hath wept: Ambition should be made of sterner stuff:
Yet Brutus says he was ambitious; And Brutus is an honourable man. You all did see that on the Lupercal
I thrice presented him a kingly crown,
Which he did thrice refuse: was this ambition? Yet Brutus says he was ambitious;
And, sure, he is an honourable man.
I speak not to disprove what Brutus spoke, But here I am to speak what I do know.
You all did love him once, not without cause: What cause withholds you then, to mourn for him? O judgment! thou art fled to brutish beasts,
And men have lost their reason. Bear with me; My heart is in the coffin there with Caesar, And I must pause till it come back to me.

tomorrow&quot;

(from Macbeth, spoken by Macbeth) Tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow, Creeps in this petty pace from day to day, To the last syllable of recorded time;
And all our yesterdays have lighted fools
The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candle! Life's but a walking shadow, a poor player, That struts and frets his hour upon the stage, And then is heard no more. It is a tale
Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, Signifying nothing.




WHEN daisies pied and violets blue, And lady-smocks all silver-white,
And cuckoo-buds of yellow hue
  Do paint the meadows with delight, The cuckoo then, on every tree, Mocks married men; for thus sings he,
Cuckoo!
Cuckoo, cuckoo! - O word of fear, Unpleasing to a married ear!

When shepherds pipe on oaten straws, And merry larks are ploughmen's clocks,
When turtles tread, and rooks, and daws, And maidens bleach their summer smocks
The cuckoo then, on every tree, Mocks married men; for thus sings he,
Cuckoo!
Cuckoo, cuckoo! - O word of fear, Unpleasing to a married ear!




WESTMORELAND. O that we now had here But one ten thousand of those men in England That do no work to-day!

KING. What's he that wishes so?
My cousin Westmoreland? No, my fair cousin; If we are mark'd to die, we are enow
To do our country loss; and if to live,
The fewer men, the greater share of honour. God's will! I pray thee, wish not one man more. By Jove, I am not covetous for gold,
Nor care I who doth feed upon my cost;
It yearns me not if men my garments wear; Such outward things dwell not in my desires. But if it be a sin to covet honour,
I am the most offending soul alive.
No, faith, my coz, wish not a man from England. God's peace! I would not lose so great an honour As one man more methinks would share from me For the best hope I have. O, do not wish one more!
Rather proclaim it, Westmoreland, through my host, That he which hath no stomach to this fight,
Let him depart; his passport shall be made, And crowns for convoy put into his purse; We would not die in that man's company That fears his fellowship to die with us.
This day is call'd the feast of Crispian.
He that outlives this day, and comes safe home, Will stand a tip-toe when this day is nam'd,
And rouse him at the name of Crispian.
He that shall live this day, and see old age, Will yearly on the vigil feast his neighbours, And say "To-morrow is Saint Crispian."
Then will he strip his sleeve and show his scars, And say "These wounds I had on Crispian's day." Old men forget; yet all shall be forgot,
But he'll remember, with advantages,
What feats he did that day. Then shall our names, Familiar in his mouth as household words-
Harry the King, Bedford and Exeter,
Warwick and Talbot, Salisbury and Gloucester- Be in their flowing cups freshly rememb'red.
This story shall the good man teach his son; And Crispin Crispian shall ne'er go by,
From this day to the ending of the world, But we in it shall be remembered-
We few, we happy few, we band of brothers; For he to-day that sheds his blood with me Shall be my brother; be he ne'er so vile, This day shall gentle his condition;
And gentlemen in England now-a-bed
Shall think themselves accurs'd they were not here, And hold their manhoods cheap whiles any speaks That fought with us upon Saint Crispin's day.




TAKE, O take those lips away, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;That so sweetly were forsworn; And those eyes, the break of day, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lights that do mislead the morn! But my kisses bring again,
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bring again; Seals of love, but seal'd in vain, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Seal'd in vain!


That time of year thou mayst in me behold When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang
Upon those boughs which shake against the cold, Bare ruined choirs, where late the sweet birds sang. In me thou see'st the twilight of such day
As after sunset fadeth in the west;
Which by and by black night doth take away, Death's second self, that seals all up in rest. In me thou see'st the glowing of such fire, That on the ashes of his youth doth lie,
As the deathbed whereon it must expire, Consumed with that which it was nourished by.
?This thou perceiv'st, which makes thy love more strong,
?To love that well which thou must leave ere long. 


ON a day--alack the day!-- Love, whose month is ever May, Spied a blossom passing fair Playing in the wanton air:
Through the velvet leaves the wind All unseen 'gan passage find;
That the lover, sick to death, Wish'd himself the heaven's breath.
Air, quoth he, thy cheeks may blow; Air, would I might triumph so!
But, alack, my hand is sworn
Ne'er to pluck thee from thy thorn: Vow, alack, for youth unmeet; Youth so apt to pluck a sweet!
Do not call it sin in me
That I am forsworn for thee;
Thou for whom e'en Jove would swear Juno but an Ethiop were;
And deny himself for Jove, Turning mortal for thy love.

And let me the canakin clink, clink; And let me the canakin clink
A soldier's a man;
A life's but a span;
Why, then, let a soldier drink. 

